a surprising thing
name of the teacher
They have rebelled against their government
They will never come to us.
He is always stealing.
"Tinda!"  Tinda was his daughter [...].  "At your service!"
He is always stealing.
The passenger got off the bus at the post office stop
the ocean is crossed by hundreds of airplanes each day
Fear God.
Pray to God.
Serve God.
Worship God; the way they worshipped.
S/he told a tale about Abunuwasi.
they abandoned their homes after the storm
one fault does not warrant divorce of a wife (proverb)
they asked themselves why she didn't want to leave her man behind
they have stopped smoking
she did not want to part with those children
our opinion is that your fiance is unsuitable for you.  break up with him
bequeath property to someone
"Chloroform," the woman's mouth lets out
abandon these issues of yours
admission fee
wedding gifts
He had not even enough to pay school fees for his children
You have no manners.
"according to the Bible, Adam was the first person".
today there is wholeness and health, tomorrow trouble and disorder
The punishment of the offense was to be isolated.
What mistake was made/that brought me this endless torment?
Color is the glory of God, and on the body is not unclean.
to punish any student at all
Every one of us wants this foe to be punished; Is it just for a person to be punished for something s/he didn't do?.
If they return late to the lessons we shall punish them [Rech]
celebrate a holiday
celebration of the mass
It is not easy to measure this significant work of his
The muezzin calls to prayer
Don't criticize me in front of the people.
noontime
mind your manners!
A woman can be as a most unobtainable object
Every one of us wants this foe to be driven outside of our borders
It is better to travel than to stay.
"Soldier!"  Yohana called.  "Effendi!"
It is better to travel than to stay.
The main thing is health
her strength is not good
he does not have good vigor
they are shaking their heads in agreement.
then she gazed at the girl who she had agreed with in the mirror
If you don't want to come to an understanding with me I will use my authority .
then leave, you and your evil genius companion
then leave, you and your wicked partner
On that very day a European officer came
agricultural officers
Egypt is a North African country.
He ornaments the stars and the heavens, roses and jasmine
It is better to travel than to stay.
The main thing is health, He is not in good health
She had come to say goodbye to her grandfather.
to die (euphemism)
New Testament, Old Testament
more often on the week-end this girl went out
A poet is usually born with a special poetic ability; water is drawn with buckets, but the work is usually done by oxen.
"Water is drawn with buckets, but the work is usually done by oxen".
Do as I have instructed you
and he arrive and commissioned his friends to help him look for work in another place.
They will <b>order</b> you to leave, but do not listen to them.
letters to order things
make a promise, break a promise/vow, keep a promise/vow
brothers and (other) relatives
to die (figurative).
from beginning to end, what is your rock-bottom price?
I advised them to delay their trip because it is raining so much
if at the time of voting irregularities take place in the voting place then it is up to the Station Supervisor to postpone the election
the examination is postponed until tomorrow
brothers and (other) relatives
Thank you very much; give thanks, say thanks
You are the one who is my disgrace.
Their neatness often made him feel ashamed to give them his hand.
All <b>kind</b>s of animals were in the forest.
What kind of food is this?
they were then admiring the scenery
an extraordinary number
then the strange things began
One surprising thing is that when our students leave school, many of them don't know at all how to write letters.
An accident occurred there today.
The physician does not delay fate
Nothing can avert an impending blow of fate (proverb).
an extraordinary number
as a result of, thanks to; therefore, because of, on the strength of
Every person who has the responsibility of hiring workers must remember this obligation.
Indecision is the horse of hunger (proverb).
You yourselves are weak.
Indecision is the horse of hunger (proverb).
feign muteness.
few things
hand of a watch or clock
his chair, his chairs
to die (figurative).
from beginning to end, what is your rock-bottom price?
crowd of people
what is saved does not spoil (proverb)
hold the burial ceremony for a child.
disagreement offended her mind
sense is wealth
when he is of sound mind, the child doesn't venture to argue with his mother
people like us
Said's family
that so and so Joseph hasn't yet arrived
to give the womenfolk an opportunity to work in factories
Juma is a person like us, kind and generous
your wealth
your place (rarely used)
hand of a watch or clock
give thanks
crowd of people
all kinds of instruments/tools, he came fully equipped
mark, indicate
"Colors are God's artisitic design, no color is a curse".
it's best I speak with you before the arrival of the doctor and the fingerprint specialists.
and so forth
and so forth
invite to a feast
summon to battle
They invited each other to various celebrations.
make the joints of one's fingers crack
either this or that
his eyes did not see any person or car nearby
question, is it true that the man went around naked was really the day he ran into his wife?
their business is house-building
leave as a pledge, give as security
can I do something for you?
Do you remember the place where you saw them?
Is this the book that you've read?
those who have gone
They went past the town without entering it.
They escaped from danger
the mountain that is visible
He has nothing to give you in life [...] while I will open the door for you to freedom from need.
its many cornered style of construction adhered to the laws of military defense [Masomo 142]
the cloth has stuck to the wound
pictures which were developed
Tell me/ how do you endure/ the pain of being separated / from your fellow human beings?; There's no one who was brave enough to be able to tell his companion.
a poor man does not pick up things, if he does, they say he stole them (proverb)
I was told
"He has studied for a long time, but hasn't benefited from it".
remove skin (rind, bark); peel an orange
which contagious diseases originate from faeces?
this man is my blood brother
I trusted him with my money.
leader of an army
lay out a new field (village)
she awoke in the morning with great eagerness
Regina got up slowly and went to have breakfast
S/he greeted them, "Good morning".
"S/he wasn't able to prevent his/her tears, s/he had no control over them".
He found himself obeying the order of that voice; What kind of person are you not following the orders of your doctor?
he has power over them
He will respect Kenya and support the directives of the national leader.
Soldiers go whenever and where ever they are commanded to go.
Mark, as he had been ordered to, left the room
wake them up, I want to see them
Lamu is the Glorious Isle
Marko decided to look for that motorboat so as to escape from that place; before he had decided correctly he had received that letter
His/her heart was full of feelings that could not be controlled.
He decided that my younger sibling should be called "Furaha.
The government directed that these schools should be started [Masomo 259]
he ordered me to go
gentle wind; a gentle, modest person (figurative)
a life in easy circumstances
God's marvels are many in every nation
they are making preparations for war (work)
Maksuudi accompanied the entire gathering
the holy month of Ramadhan ended with joy after the new moon appeared
he cannot begin his own style of composing poetry if he doesn't follow the rules of poetic composition
Yohana entered following two guards
new moon (rare)
draw a picture
set the table
Education is not just knowing how to read and write.
he wrote him a letter
the letters that they were writing to each other before breaking up
Holy Scriptures
the words that were written by Idi's hand.
weather conditions
give me food even if it is only a little
look!
when you observe with your eyes you tilt your head down
watch out!
be caught/tangled in a tree
give me food even if it is only a little
His eyes are focussed on his country.
the moon lights up the night
fix one's eyes on something, stare
my child, my house
pick coconuts
hatch eggs
burst out laughing, burst into tears
If snow <b>falls</b>, we won't go to the beach.
waterfall
when he explained to his friends, they burst out laughing at him
Amin's planes dropped bombs on Bukoba and Mwanza.
he fought for his life
he intends to become a teacher
dry meat; dry fish; dry clothes, air clothes; your work is to grate coconut then you go to dry it.
it has stopped raining, it has cleared up (figurative)
address a letter
begin to work
They started to use this dictionary last year.
He claimed that from that day onwards
found a party
When they began that school they hired two teachers.
The leaders who founded the OAU in 1963
the aim in initiating this party
their country, their countries
their shop
President Nyerere vowed to increase cooperation and strengthen the OAU
Her father cursed himself, "If my daughter returns, truly I will not force her to get married nor will I arrange a husband for her [Balisidya, Masomo 353]
April is the fourth month
four hundred, the fourth country
Concerning the earth and the sky, His word is true.
Land definitely was a major problem between us and the evil settler government that denied us justice [Kenyatta, Masomo 116]
Let's write with pride
cycles of reporting have to be in place to ensure that partners are informed about progress and challenges
four hundred, the fourth country
the forty days of the Passion of Jesus Christ
honey, molasses, "Follow the bee and you wil get honey" (proverb - i.e., find a patron)
After a good meal, she thanked the cook, "Thank you very much for the food."
Thank you very much; give thanks, say thanks
note improvement
evoke affection
evoke yearning
Signaling with his middle finger.
Chahe signaled to Boke that she should sit.
evoke affection
evoke yearning
They have rebelled against their government
prison guard; local constable, local constabulary (wearing kanzu rather than uniform)
policeman, cavalry
of original/proven quality
on average more than ninety <strong>percent</strong> of children are in school
early morning, from morning to evening
early morning, from morning to evening
early morning, from morning to evening
The women decorate themselves with jasimine
X is divorced from his wife.
He left his wife and children going on foot.
he has only one eye (euphamism)
A poet may influence people .
She was wounded in two places, in the head and in the chest.
"Say, they tell me those people are strangers".
Hey you!
satin
atomic bomb
the ground is cracked from the heat of the sun
Do you want coffee or tea?
inspect a school
survey (mark out) a field
This matter is better (more important), it is unimportant (inconsequential)
durable pottery
from beginnning to end; take the first or nothing (proverb)
squander money, squander property
Initially she was hostile and did not offer assistance.
from beginnning to end; take the first or nothing (proverb)
The buildings of this college are being repaired and the first part will be complete next year.
to join together sentences so that they form paragraphs
watch out for the scoundrel who is in the tree (proverb)
no-confidence motion
no-confidence motion
Don't criticize me in front of the people.
she was passing among numerous bars to find men
this rain has led to a great catastrophe
after many years, after work
The Portuguese arrived in Mombasa and afterwards proceeded to Malindi.
We will eat now, <b>afterwards</b> we will visit our friend.
we'll see each other later
The students are divided into two sections
some of the people; some days
Holy Father, Pope
uncle (older/younger brother of one's father)
beat with the wings
the Fathers of the Church
of superior quality (character), of inferior quality (character)
instead of
change one's mind; have a change of air (rest, recuperation); change money; change clothes
We know God Alimighty, through what is changeable
When she returned Matika was not like before.  She had changed greatly.
They have not yet arrived
He is still a child.
they smiled inside the immensity of their understanding
they could see the ocean if it sparkled in the sun
literature is vast and has many branches
do not forget what it is to be a sailor because of being a captain yourself (proverb)
good luck!
I was fortunate enough to have conversations with him.
The property of a miser is apt to be eaten by insects (proverb).
among the people
between Tanga and Dar es Salaam
that murderer is now recognized
I realized that our complaints and demands needed to be strengthened and to be better explained.  Jomo Kenyatta
white overalls with black stains from automotive grease
My grandchild even today you can see what remains of ancient life.
One entered the room and the other stayed here.
saltcellar
this rain has led to a great catastrophe
Here at home a major problem has developed and you don't want to mention it.
white mbalanga, black mbalanga
When a girl reaches puberty she becomes a young woman
this girl is now at the age of puberty
the car door slammed close with a forceful bang
the pants were tight-fitting on her
ankle bracelet
ankle bracelet
S/he told a tale about Banawasi
horse stable, garage, rail station, hangar, shed erected on plantations as a rest place for workers
river port
sew, stitch
artificial arm
doll
affix a stamp, put on a bandage
put on a load
ankle bracelet
cooperative bank, postal savings bank, bank of issue
diving board, trampoline
prophesy, tell fortunes
level surface
level surface
continent of Africa
To prepare children so that they will be able to participate appropriately in national life.
traffic regulations
to wish they have, success, blessings, a good life and a strong heart
he has had bad luck
legislative assembly
12 ministers who were in the cabinet of retired President Benjamin Mkapa were returned in the new cabinet
World Peace Council
Those people sat on the baraza.
The cold from Mount Kenya is entering; cold war
rheumatism
gentle words
a chill enveloped him
She read the <b>letter</b> that I wrote.
O.K.  First you must feel some shame!
"well, let's go".
Listen to the cry that is spreading out/in sadness announcing/ the dange that is spreading itself.
l hope it is good news
well, let's go
well, let's go
The pistol was used to kill the dogs.
Americans eat <b>turkey</b> for the Thanksgiving holiday
corrugated-iron hut
sheet-metal worker
coat or line with tin
"diving board, trampoline".
"prophesy, tell fortunes".
game played on a board
we scored six goals
don't force me!
guard in a prison.
wicked person
that murderer is now recognized
she was not carrying heavy things
the truck will not be <b>transport</b>ing fruit
swing cloths
dictatorial government
Tegemea put his hoe on his shoulder; shoulder to shoulder eg.  side by side
passenger [freight] car
this house consists of a single room [i.e.  is not divided up by partitions.
I wanted to buy the car, but I decided to seek a good <b>price</b>.
public treasury
Mosquitos must be kept off.
river port
he turns like a flag in the wind
the banner flutters in the wind
cooperative bank
Band instruments are used.
postal savings bank
Idi and Bahati were in a black Mercedes
At this point he is lowering his shoulders to show that he is overwhelmed.
this is our joint shop
carry on business
advertise
merchandise
Ladies and Gentlemen
as it was for their men and women of the past, the women of Zanzibar today continue to meet and dance from time to time
someone else wore <i>kangas</i> with [pictures of] cashew apples, they made her look good.
His trousers had been cut to adopt the style of a beachcomber.
I am compelled to study
Perhaps the war will intensify between them and force the OAU to look for firm ways to end this quarrel.
he had to go
I am obliged to study
I'm under pressure to study
Regina farmed cotton assiduously
the Holy Virgin Mary
without concern about the difficulties
it was over and done beyond her control
he struck him without reason.
You are upset for no reason.
take soundings
he struck him for no reason
There were receipts of payments and bills for debts
he is a fanatical football fan.
life-insurance
organize a lottery
Salim son of Mustafa
Tell me, /how do you endure/ the pain of being separated from/your fellow human beings?
to drive oneself is freedom
personal hygiene [Masomo 126]
I've come here on my own private business
I built this house by myself
It is clear then that a poet is an expert in language.
Her father had arranged with a family that he would marry his daughter to any youth from that family [Masomo 347]
Belgian Congo
wind thread on a ball.
The wife <b>quarrel</b>led with her husband, who was late.
Quarreling is pointless.
the child doesn't venture to argue with his mother
Now you seem to have been blabbered at with completely nonsensical words.
national board
"fortify, enclose, fence in".
plumber
she takes a bucket and hurries to the pump outside
viral fever
viral fever
viral fever
short, baggy trousers
carve figures/ornaments.
demolish a wall
Oh!  Aziza has come to destroy me!
tear down all the doors and windows
a veranda on the left has fallen down
atomic bomb
river bed
In his brain Mark heard a voice
when bananas feel soft they are ripe.
blessings are better than wealth (proverb)
the best thing is good health
the builder fell off the roof of the house.
The bosses don't reject you.
one who stores half grown fruit eats it rotten (proverb)
unreliable person
to brush
put on the brake
landlord; supervisor of a shamba; [sometimes used in a derogatory way to refer to the former] colonial landowners.
"landlord, supervisor of a shamba; [sometimes used in a derogatory way to refer to the former] colonial landowners".
sir [showing a higher degree of respect than bwana alone, but sometimes humorous or contemptuous, especially when used of women]
burst out with a flood of words
the water gushes out
the people were pushing and shoving [each other]
the people were pushing and shoving [each other]
she saw she had no alternative to pronouncing the word that would call her companion
All this time I was thinking that you have a brain inside of that skull of yours, but it's just useless liquid [Chacha, Masomo 378]
skull
burst out with a flood of words
the water gushes out
recovery of health after an illness
children's game [a kind of hide and seek]
The insects that are eaten by bats include scorpions, butterflys, and spiders.
embroidered white cap
swarm of bees
pack of cigarettes
be perplexed/dismayed
a bundle of banknotes
a package of tobacco
Maina and her companions each took a .303 caliber rifle
"Bengal rice, manioc".
fabricate statements
write a book
the day when the party of TANU was founded
l am like a globefish, I have a clever head (to overcome all difficulties) (proverb)
The mason wasp has filled its nest with caterpillars.
skull
to brush
the shopkeeper gave me three tomatoes for free
all her efforts were in vain
work for nothing
say farewell
mother is fanning the fire
mother is fanning the fire
words that would be expected to come from an old man with wisdom
Mother has a flower and vegetable garden.
he went to the car to take out the tinned food in the boot
a dull knife
an obtuse-angled triangle
woodworm
"free the heart , be conforted".
ladies and gentlemen
big man
A small pool of blood surrounded her
people see me as stupid
he returned to the dormitory
an entire chest of valuable clothes that she left at home
I am sad, or I weep for myself, I ought to be afraid
yearning for when it should be dawn in the city
the fear of God is not wearing a white turban (proverb)
it is growing light (day is breaking)
as a person who respects God [Masomo, 88]
tissue paper
tissue paper
sour
don't play with politics, politics is a dirty game
to excite him and stir up his desire
if the voter spoils her ballot she can ask for another
the sea was very rough
if her vote is messed up, it will not be counted
her mind was troubled after that quarrel
Zakaria got upset, [and] Rosa was called at once
international crisis
If during the voting period irregularities take place in the voting place [Masomo, 103]
to sneeze
elect by ballot
she made <b>tea</b> and coffee for her guests
There was a red sofa set that was worn out
gnash the teeth
he was drunk
his/her name
his chair
his/her name
I will come to your place
your fruit
peck or pick up rubbish
if you are hungry, eat a lot of food
lie on one's back
a trap without bait catches nothing (proverb)
he planned to rape her using the lure of money
the fisherman cleaned the fish for her
she quickly combed her hair
he removed a book and pen from his coat pocket, pulled off a page and wrote out a divorce statement
he began to tear the clothes he was wearing
stick together [be inseparable like fingers or toes]
stick together [be inseparable like fingers or toes]
my wife wasn't an adult when it came to some things, but she wasn't immature about many
he heard the voice of an undeveloped child
I am a very young child
new moon
they contributed cows, corn, beans, money
shuffle cards
She picks up the glass.  She sniffs it and smells the strong alcohol smell of home-brewed grain alcohol.
We <b>cheered up</b> the baby who was crying.
jumble words
break the egg slowly and pour it in the pan without mixing the white and the egg yolk
that place blended natural beauty with desolation
her desire was mixed with the bitterness of birth
the fishermen fished for snapper
my child
white overalls that were in rags
iron grillwork
chop up firewood
vaccinate against smallpox
splitting firewood awaits us
to gather conch, oysters, shellfish, large crabs, small crabs, or crabs hiding in the sand
he combed his hair
another bouquet of roses bent down with sadness, half open
Women are the cause
numbness of the teeth [produced by an anesthetic]
a yearning of many days for which he thought a motive had become available
their work
their countries.
he hadn't pulled out even a banknote to pay for his children's school fees
yeah, I should pick up a stick and beat you all
they themselves gave me permission to print these letters
sew with the sewing machine
a single finger kills no louse (proverb)
there are oysters under the sea
he was happy to see the sparks fly and to hear the fire that roared
watery manioc
he is bowlegged
then he laughed a little
when her children mocked her she would tell them...
he sifted the flour
a pretty face made him smile
he is an amusing person
the child decided well, however her mother feared for her
he should not try to be late a second time
without waiting for her or taking any of her girlfriends, who could delay her
Lulu was playing with bread crumbs
granulated sugar
chop firewood
flour that is not well ground
[small] change
your things
first-class passenger
he was hired by the government as Executive Officer since 26 March, 1973, and from there he was promoted until he arrived at the position he held prior to this appointment
the status and honor he was given by people made him forget where he came from
tailor
be wounded
machine sewn work
People's Liberation Army
certificate of completion of seven years of study
our child
our book
a mouth like a big fish
the girl surpassed her companions in dance and song.
he was very drunk
to sell what remains after grating and squeezing the liquid out of the flesh of a coconut
go on foot
a single hand cannot slaughter a cow (proverb)
be eaten by the sea-monster [i.e., drown]
The sounds of all the birds stopped except that of the canary.
trickling tears
Lulu likes cheese
goodbye stupid brother, derelict, crook
I don't want this foolishness of yours of irritating words.
she cut the tree with an ax
I have not slept for a long time and I'm <b>exhausted</b>.
the tourists are tired of the trip
prepare lime by burning
The builder put mortar between the bricks in order to bind them
pick the teeth
for christmas the children were given dolls and treats like candy and chocolates
to excite him and stir up his desire
that man Jemadari isn't really a general, but it's a name he was given just to tease him
The King of Mombasa killed the Portuguese commander by knifing him.
In consideration of the concerns of young people the Ministry cooperates with other agencies of the Nation.
every vessel has its own waves (proverb)
Rehema took a tray of dishes and she washed them
to pull the implements out of the water, or to plunge them in
tools/instruments for working
spaceship
iron slag
borrow money
pull out a knife
carve a statue
sharpen a pencil
the pepper that burns on the tongue
cause unrest
if you want nice <b>bathrooms</b>, you need to dig a deep hole yourself
be lame, limp
These issues of yours have exhausted me
draw water [by the bucketful]
the girl is a half-breed, from Shangwe's age group
all of it
constant dipping will empty a gourd of honey (proverb)
he rolled his ball of ugali before plunging it into the coconut sauce
miser
he is a stingy person
a sunbird or a Pemba white-eye was coming down below
Not even one tear came from Rukia
get sore feet
he was very drunk
pick out a few people
The exam selects the students having the ability to enter secondary [school].
Mrs Rozi was pale, thin, rude and a gossip
Has it become hatred?
All of the people of Tanzania were very much angered by this action.
cup, bleed
story, fiction
his trousers had been cut to adopt a "beachcomber" style
carry your few shillings
endure hardships
last a long time
the water removes the sand
that is the garment [kanzu] that suits you better than all others
were she able to take the stove and they could support her
the dress is in harmony with the body
in some places this school is the first years of university education but in other states it is considered to be part of secondary school
pestle
me, I have my girlfriend
this man is as steady as a piece of iron
paper and pen in the bag, ready to pick, to save and to write
the door of the wall safe was iron
bedroom
bitter words
harsh words
water in a coconut shell is like an ocean to an ant (proverb)
to make pottery
I met a tremendous crowd of people
The opening enabled the detective to look inside the wide entry room.
she wanted a good price for her sweet <b>oranges</b>
be eaten by a sea-monster
saliferous earth
prayer-book
the school of liberation came to liberate me.
Alinunua chupa ya maziwa
the frog jumps
my trousers have become too small for me
Large bats eat even lizards, frogs, birds and also fish.
watery rice
fight hand to hand
two automobiles collided
two automobiles collided
two automobiles collided.
two automobiles collided
account book
account book
account book
account book
account book
coconut milk
fight hand to hand
claim for money, amount due, debt
claim for money, amount due, debt
The strangers claimed that their intention in coming to these parts was to bring civilization; he claimed a divorce.
she will love you forever
the careful ears of the detective caught the voice of a young woman in pain
in a few minutes
"Each person has his own work?"  he interrupted me
footprint; It is forbidden to show any indications of racial discrimination
It is not a mark of bitterness, sin or lack.
bad omen
footprint
footprint
footprint
walk gracefully
walk gracefully
go at a trot
bleed
menstraute
my own flesh and blood
dip up water
The doctor deceived you, he didn't leave a motorboat on the island.
a deceitful person
railroad bridge
he has been promoted
have responsibilities, be responsible
a kanzu decorated with embroidery.
according to custom
chief of state
an ivory tooth is not a cure for the lost tooth (proverb)
the keyring had no fewer than a dozen keys; gradually dozens of women who had eaten a lot of salt poured inside
watery rice
stand unsteadily
If you see him you'll be surprised (and so be unsteady on your feet).
If you see him you'll be surprised (and so be unsteady on your feet).
account book
fern for children
behead, decapitate
a bad omen
footprint
comm.  democratic centralism
billy goat
Eaters of flour and lentils
behead, decapitate
pay debts
pilot
according to custom
it is customary.
gold necklace
It was clear that that girl hadn't eaten.
It is evident then that a poet is an expert in language.
A child may get high marks in writing but surprisingly is weak in conversational skills.
"and so forth, etc".
I know you have a fiancee, it's that poor farmer
The oppressive character of European rule is approaching its end.
give security
original sin
betel leaf
his intention was that you should live here with me
since then you've thought about marrying another woman
a poet usually is born with a special poetic ability but it shouldn't be assumed that another person may not be an excellent poet
the fools of the world, consider color a stigma
his mouth drooled so much you would imagine a pipe had burst
one with a scar, do not think him healed (proverb)
the forum suspected that the youth initially read it himself
be injured
You just show contempt.
Mr.  Haji had urgent and unexpected business
make fun of, mock, deride
when the truth is obvious, falsehood usually gives way
Father explains the truth.
one of the difficulties I was seeing is that we won't live by ourselves
after misfortune comes relief (proverb)
how many have been ruined by wanting to defraud people of their rights?
how many have been ruined by wanting to defraud people of their rights?
you should not treat a person unjustly
it does no harm.  it does not matter.  all right, OK
kuleta hasara [Masomo 29]
I won't hurt you, but I will hurt other people.
pay a penalty
cesspool
hole for planting seed
the child doesn't venture to argue with his mother
he talked to himself again at the shop counter while buying eight bottles of orange juice
wind blew slowly passing through the window
deputy minister
I speak a little Swahili.
sub-committee
chief of state
boast, brag
he talks constantly/chatters
the fish are biting now [it is a good time for fishing]
chickens pick up grain.
sore that refuses to heal
ball of yarn
clot of blood
If the money he receives disappears where will you be?
potter's clay
he got into the house by breaking through the wall
outpost
a part of the kanga
pilot
pray
waterwheel
what kind of a thing is that?
chicken pox
Insignificant and remarkable people, those who are the same and who are different.
foolish/stupid person
a blunt knife
they broke into a shop that sells human and animal medicines in the city of Dar es Salaam by using gas, and stole more than 20 million shillings and three small computers
I went to the <b>store</b> to buy household necessities
giant
the one who keeps silent, endures (proverb)
his relationship with the local people did not last long.
all his strength that looked healthy and would remain with him forever
cockpit [of an airplane]
ceremony for exorcising an evil spirit
You have underrated yourself as inferior/inferior by underestimation.
an unimportant matter
continent
euph.  depart from the world, die
You have underrated yourself as inferior/inferior by underestimation.
now it is my turn [to drink]
he has lost his mind
the steering wheel is round
waterwheel
Boke [...] Hey!  Who do you think you are?
Yeah, I should pick up a stick and beat you [pl].
Boke approaches Chahe.
the ship is moored [at the wharf]
Bairam festival
my house faces south
it seems that he will come
The Portuguese thought it best to go to Malindi [Masomo 141]
opposite sides/lines
A voter who is unable to read may ask the Station Supervisor to explain things to him/her [Masomo, 102]
The objective of secondary education is to educate young people.
agricultural science
Good Friday
pleasant breeze
good night
pleasant words will draw the snake from its hole (proverb)
fine grain
a narrow valley
a slim/slender person
I should slice a mango and give it to a hungry person to eat
steam engine
to go on foot
a log can not move except by the help of rollers (proverb)
go to collect firewood
the street is impassable
pay no attention to his words
humor your father's whims
the story will be continued
economic development is important for the strength of a country
one objective of tests is to measure the progress of each child
they continued with their agricultural work and that of providing essential services
they could conduct their business without worries
although the doctor forgot to teach him to drive it, he decided to look for that motorboat so as to escape from that place
spread the news, advertise
slow [rapid] gait
how many cities have buses to serve all areas of these cities?
the extent of this country
she was the supervisor of all the police stations in that province
military occupation zone
four square inches
Different ways were used to spread education.
New Testament
steam engine
your child
your name
your house
thickly populated city [city having many people]
the man himself
when will you remember those who love you and honor and respect you?
This heroic leader left with the Meru people [Masomo, 87]
Easy and difficult questions should be mixed.
slipper; bats have lightweight bodies
Let's avoid this storm my child; avoiding the eyes and mouths of peope from oneself.
those shrewd people will go back to the office and begin to enrich themselves
when a fool becomes enlightened, the wise man is in trouble (proverb)
airline
The strangers had no right to oppress the Africans on the false pretense that they were civilizing them
Hey!  you
what did you say?
our book
open land [without trees]
She was not able to see the <b>black</b> car because it was night.
cover a roof [with grass, straw]
The hat <b>suit</b>s her face
Our opinion is that this fiance is unsuitable for you.  Break up with him.
I don't forget kindness
Wait and let me make this clear to you.
two bulls cannot live in the same farmyard (proverb)
I fell and lost consciousness for a time
If she <b>understand</b>s the question, she will answer it.
Today we again remember these heroes with honor.
The splendor of the world and of the sky above us
to want to benefit those who do not have a great knowledge of Kiswahili [Masomo 394]
after a long campaign for the candidates of various political parties for President, Parliament, and Councillor, finally the 'finals' are over today
We wish him every advantage and success
teachers of various types of games
TANU and the ASP had been successful in liberating Tanzania; I don't see if there is a desire to succeed.
What are you doing here?
Unafanya nini hapa?
Use of pictures to tell a story
The teacher asks about things that were done before I was born.
before my grandfather died
Literature is vast and has many branches.
he has neither origins nor descendents
without leaving anything disgraceful
He publicly humiliated me.
Rendo concealed completely the information about the glasses.
After a distance of half a kilometer she set down her calabash and hid it [Masomo 351]
hidden talent
He has placed one of his workers so that he will protect these hiding places
At this point the voice is becoming faint.
two stones can't support a pot (proverb)
to run is not necessarily to arrive (proverb)
this is a good time to consider new plans
two more years enable her to reach her doctoral degree.
a stick that you don't have in hand won’t kill a snake (proverb)
she burst out laughing with derision
grease spot
the pupil's book
by yourself /
Are you traveling by yourself, without a companion?
Unasafiri peke yako, bila mwenzako?
if you take off your clothes for water you must bathe (proverb)
there were a great deal of people at the meeting
roll steel
the water has flooded the land
his shoes squeeze him
it is a narrow street
she is bereaved of her child (her child has died)
our team won in the contest
her mirror was still in the frame
Moslems do not eat the meat of animals found dead
abide by what I tell you
he accompanied her to gather wood
copy as an example
follow bees and you will get honey (proverb)
obey the law
her mother gave permission that she could accompany Jazume
the second blow dropped him on his face
a fine girl in the village was able to marry a young beggar
this person was very poor ...[Mganga Pazi p.  2]
to gather conch, oysters, shellfish, large crabs, small crabs, or crabs hiding in the sand
he who is chased away from home has nowhere to go (proverb)
lump of flour
she closed her eyes
Bahati's heart was shut in a state of misery
she had clutched her hands to her chest
a rose flower with hidden meaning
[those words] were offered as a puzzle for his mother
put a riddle to a fool a clever person will solve it (proverb)
speak in metaphors
when he opened his eyes he saw his wife was still sleeping
now [Bahati's heart] was already open
to breakfast on a mouthful of tea without anything else
where there are experts, there will be no lack of learners (proverb)
sewing-machine repairman
he is a master at playing football
what beats you is what educates you (proverb - i.e., spare the rod and spoil the child)
the teacher <b>taught</b> the students Arabic, but did not <b>teach</b> them Swahili
He didn't want to <b>open</b> the door because he felt cold.
the water has flooded the land
If you suceed, I will <b>be happy</b>.
the sharpness of the teeth dove into the fat of his meat
she cleansed the black garments
his eyes, skinny and dry, that concealed cunning and wisdom
she has been blessed with every quality desirable to go forward and succeed in life these days
she was moaning and turning restlessly in her bed
he expected his house to be a ruin with the quiet of a tomb
we travelled by car from Moshi to Nairobi
The <b>train</b> has become full of people, therefore I think I will not be be traveling tomorrow.
mama will help me to sew a dress
he grabbed Rosa by her neck on the collar of her gown
divide in equal parts
her face divided up into parts
provincial newspaper
a log can not move except by the help of rollers (proverb)
the people are on strike and won't work until their pay is increased
we have been forbidden to go
our parents scolded us that way so we wouldn't forget
The bus collided with the giraffe that had fallen.
he plays hockey with a thick stick
the thumb of his left hand that carried the bottle plugged the bottle's lip
disclose a secret
then she discovered that she had been making mistakes that whole time
many times Nunga caught Kaburu unawares with a yearning eye
later he came to realize that that funeral wasn't exactly a funeral
unrefined sugar
if they get involved in pushing forward the wheel of progress
the work they have already done is not slight
a few days
little by little fills the container (proverb)
what's the news?  what's the news of the morning?; what's the news of the day?
public meeting
the worker was a dignified man, dark, with long straight hair
If you tell him a <b>story</b>, the child will fall sleep.
those dresses are poor quality
and if this idea is not it, I am asking something trivial
weak light
In established democracies it is permitted to say anything.
It is difficult to be permitted to sell firearms in some countries.
under all circumstances
your mother is in critical condition
state of emergency
the present situation
What are you doing here?
Unafanya nini hapa?
at that store already discussed
(proverb) a rotten coconut is the spoiler of the fresh
He did not want to eat dinner, because he did not like <b>beans</b>.
haste is not a blessing
hurry up!
borrowing is like a wedding, repaying is like mourning (proverb)
anger brings damage/loss (proverb)
profit and loss; his loss isn't ours
<b>Even</b> the teacher didn't know the answer.
this work jeopardizes the safety of the news reporters
he is guilty
these people
Rosa, with much bashfulness, took her bag and her notebooks
these clothes
if now the children went to school, congratulations to their mother
better a clever enemy than a stupid friend [proverb]
they counted the years, months, days
Kidawa liked that his options should be his own
voluntary work is better than slavery (proverb)
that institute already discussed
there came into being a new kind of monk who, as well as following a spiritual life, held a sword, to escort, protect and welcome those on a pilgrimage to Jerusalem
the Germans destroyed what could not be taken
I am a mud hut, I can not bear shocks (proverb)
on her shoulders she supported her best friend
This man belongs to my age-group
kindness does not turn bad (proverb)
African history
give her that which she needs
the Airbus A380 concluded its test flight by landing safely at Toulouse
this child has completed school
that day already discussed
that's right, he plays hockey with a thick stick
"Champ, many congratulations"
When you marry her, I will say to you "I give you my <b>congratulations</b>!"
he might see that gift as a note like other money Shangwe got from other people
a meeting attended by President Hu Jintao of China
first aid
her age is maybe about twenty one years
perhaps [my] grandfather's generation would have wondered about a person with (only) one wife.  (Ken Walibora, Siku Njema, 1996, p.  1)
possibly he will come
how are you?  I'm fine.
he has no authority here
Don't judge me, because you are not a magistrate.
feel free to communicate with me or any of my colleagues in this group (ideas and advice blog, 18 May, 2006)
The United Republic of Tanzania began from the union of two independent countries, Tanganyika and Zanzibar
that carpenter already discussed
a poor man does not pick up things, if he does, they say he stole them (proverb)
Then the devil left him, and behold, angels came and waited on him (Matthew 4:11)
he seized the dragon—that serpent of old, the Devil or Satan—and chained him up for a thousand years [Revelation 20:2]
we have been robbed
Ministry of Education
Iraqi parliament approves new government
if there is someone you are in love with, don't give her cause for unease
Magoma's corpse is just as he left it, apart from blood no longer flowing
but you are fortunate
a log can not move except by the help of rollers (proverb)
that news
those trees
he didn't see why Rehema should do outdoor work while she could be in the kitchen
you men have no consciences
it was the conviction of everyone that Shangwe would take first place in the race
she looked at that little angel with kindness
he has no confidence in his friend
The children will <b>sing</b> many songs today.
a new thing is a good thing even if it is a sore (proverb)
come home
If you choose <b>another</b> restaurant please tell me and I will meet you there.
police inspector
this stall was chock-full of flies
peaceful coexistence
to last forever
to live long is to see much (proverb)
running on the roof finishes at the edge (proverb)
each person
Muslims believe that the Koran is the word of God.
he is called Saidi; as it is called
come running
it will turn out that I have to go on a trip
Brother Lupituko didn't know anything about the genealogy of the people of the village
these people don't have the same origins as us
to look upon this inheritance ... as a forced lineage
under the present circumstances
this is an obvious fact
difficult matter
I would trade all my tomorrows for just one yesterday
the previous week
yesterday love was such an easy game to play
go into the bush
atomic bomb test
perhaps he gave the money to a cooperative society
little by little fills the container (proverb)
What are you doing?
one who selects his hoe is not a real farmer (proverb)
he laughs at a scar who has received no wound (proverb)
it was only the pain of the injuries she had already given him
this question is not answerable
The prisoner refused to <b>answer</b> questions from the police.
If you send me an email, I will <b>reply</b>.
Do you have issues to which I can <b>respond</b>?
one who has eyes is not told to look (he does it himself) (proverb)
the man can pass and do as if he forgets to knock on the door
these girls pretended to sleep
this road is not passable
to stumble is not to fall down, but go forward (proverb)
the cock crows
the rooster crows
what is your name?
Criminal Procedures: Self-Help Kit No.  12
plug of pressed tobacco
the teeth of a dog do not lock together (proverb - i.e., brothers do not harm one another when they fight)
before explaining the history and other information about Tanzanians and the way in which our country was ruled ...
he thought that maybe he would plan to hang himself
she saw how her hair was knotted and twisted
effort will not counter faith (proverb)
all the zeal he had for this creature brought no good
we must make an effort to protect the honor of our name
the well became available after people took the initiative and asked the government for equipment
it was necessary that the elders volunteer
stone house
stone house
but really, a city rooster cannot crow on the farm
the village cock does not crow in town (proverb)
it is estimated that more than 80% of people in the country of Tanzania know how to read and to write
she could not recognize who she was
the efforts of the US and of other nations to put an end to world terrorism
it's not known where she lives
his eyes ... informed him that ...
many Christians go to church every Sunday
we have come from signing the Agreement founding the East African Community Trade Organisation
a large pot of soup on his grandmother's stove
regrets are like a grandchild (proverb - i.e., they come some considerable time after event)
she cries from the sorrow that Idi had lost her
in spite of that, Subira squeezed out all her strength
city life has its own speed and it is incumbent upon a person who will live there to adjust
three big rooms upstairs
I am tired because I have been working since the <b>day before yesterday</b>
it is permissable to go
it is not suitable for that poor man to enter the house of a lord
in many regions of Tanzania there are big mountains, e.g.  Moshi, Arusha, and Mbeya
(and) he went
coral rag, coal, ashes, salt, cloves and ginger
to gather conch, oysters, shellfish, large crabs, small crabs, or crabs hiding in the sand
glowing hot embers
it will continue for many days
these earthenware pots have lasted for a long time
it was necessary for her to come live near the school
reside in the city
he was offered a seat and he sat
her hopes of staying with those children resided in the five-month old fetus she now had
wait while I see if it will suit me
wait here, I'll be back right away
to roast meat
There's no person more thrifty than a farmer
I had become <b>totally</b> lost, I didn't know how to get there nor how to return.
before he will come
several days ago
before using the Edit Engine, you must first register as a Kamusi contributor
We will read many books <b>before</b> our literature exam.
if you don't know death, look at the grave (proverb)
a deserted village with the quiet of a tomb
Nunga thought he was the son of a Boer farmer
it is estimated that more than 80% of people in the country of Tanzania know how to read and to write
an infidel who does you a good turn is not like a Muslim who does not (proverb)
serve even an unbeliever to attain your own ends (proverb)
she is drinking <b>coffee</b> because she has not slept since two days ago
disobedient child
It is the <b>strong man</b> who guards my house.
a distressing question
the intense sun
the scorching sun
a severe judgement
a sharp knife
vinegar is sour
strong palm wine
an urgent question
a lion is a violent animal
a lion is a wild animal
we sat for food
these houses are uninhabitable
to seat Shangwe on the bed by force
this country is settled
about ten shillings
as you like
if you wish
scream like a child
gold is more valuable than silver
we have seen that he went away
they called to him (and asked) whether he was coming
catch with a trap
a drowning man grasps at water (proverb)
air is not palpable
she realized that her days sitting there would be spent cutting rope
a new fowl always has string around its legs (proverb)
you'll stay here in the camp, not as a prisoner but as a free man
Birgit arrived at class at 10:00 sharp.
Airbus A380 completes its first flight
Subira squeezed out all her strength
wring out clothes
he tried hard to talk, but tears came instead of a voice
The Internet Living Swahili Dictionary is the only dictionary of its kind in the world
repudiate a debt
she doesn't have even one cotton wrapper
a guineafowl does not lay eggs abroad (i.e.  in strange places) (proverb)
She went to <b>church</b> and she prayed there.
he owns nothing
captain of a warship
he washed his clothes and threw them in a big basket
invite somebody to sit down
alas, dear reader, many problems are in store for you (<i>lit.</i> you will be approached by many problems) this month
he cried almost all night long
we live near this city; nine is near ten (proverb)
in its vicinity
these people are my close relatives
please be seated!
would you all please be seated!
next to this building there is a tree
this hoe has been recently used
"Hush!"  Kaburu reprimanded; her good teacher didn't reprimand her
his being late a few minutes got him a scolding
the present century, modern times
A quarter till noon
A quarter till noon
they took the box that was empty there in the store
clothes chest
If you bother me, I will <b>be angry</b>.
My friend was <b>angry</b> at me because I forgot to call her.
If my mother <b>is annoyed with</b> me, I won't go home.
Ward Secretary of Ndzangano Ward
Tegemea brought water in a ladle
abbreviate words
chop firewood
constant rubbing of a rope will cut a stone (proverb)
fell a tree
reduce wages
he flew on his bicycle and turned left
this is the final word
room (part of a house)
section/chapter of a book
a person does not object to being called, he objects to what he is called for (proverb)
the student who <b>refuse</b>d to read the book did not pass the test
Ms Tamima flatly refused both pieces of advice
I have turned him down
forbid the people to go
among countries, international
central committee; Central Africa
put/place in the middle
in the middle of the place
"I knew you would come.." he interrupted her
concerning those reports
during the whole time
come from a country
go to a city
go into a city
this wood can not be cut
his desire refused to come to an end
he interrupted me forcefully
with one voice, unanimously
they have been drying fruit
it was dry before
she continued to look at them with her narrow, nonchalant eyes
to breakfast on a mouthful of tea without anything else
a deceitful person
a dried up river
Miss Rozi was pale, thin, rude and a gossip
curve to the right
we belong together like a dish and its lid
follow customs
follow the rules
follow the rule
usage is like law (proverb)
his being late a few minutes got him a scolding
Mr.  Lupituko didn't loiter
kanzu with decorations
even if he fails the exam he will be given employment in the shop
naval service
Matata bought the girls soda and cake
nine is near ten (proverb)
the first bell rang
a squinting/cross-eyed person
the election will occur tomorrow
she was admitted to the hospital on Friday, and she died the next day
I'd trade all my tomorrows for just one yesterday
bank robbery cases decreased by 57.5%
sit down in a chair
please take a seat
the men were seated inside and the women were told to sit on the veranda
she cannot travel because the road is impassable
impassable highway
African languages
they sat in the African manner, on mats
ten beers were like a starter
trial by fire
he was dressed in the Arab manner, robe and cap
go walking for a short time
What is the price?
military service
her parents bought the <b>shoes</b> that she was wearing
your hut won't be destroyed
to fill the General and his lackeys with worries
these days he has no employment
you need a house-boy, a job for someone
she drew toward the light of the oil lamp
to give tinned food
woman, you have a stoop
matchbox
my house faces north
he took the lash and brought it down on Nunga's back
arrogance is not gentlemanly (proverb)
confusion, madness, and rage grew increasingly
he has a mental disorder (he is insane)
mama put the food that remained in the storage container
a good woman is like a rose on the bush
he was lying on his back
contribute to a collection
I left my comb on the table
he feels sick and his limbs are weak
there are voices that laugh secretively
they saw something frightening that made their jaws drop open
Bahati passed through alleyways
he has sharp pains
to go to the market and quickly grab up the small ingredients that were needed for the guest's food
he is a heavy drinker
mama carried the load on her head
to play the game "kidau-cha-mpamba"
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC)
she tucked up her sleeves to fulfill the traditions and obligations of marriage
he tugged his goatee with his hand
... it can give us suggestions for answering the questions
she clicks her tongue while she talks
it tried to hide the black thumb mark
he talks continuously.
a new thing is a good thing even if it is a sore (proverb)
you shouldn't put a hot nail on the wound
he gets the required medicine and swallows two pills
what in the world is this indefinable thing?
what is this mysterious thing?
millions of plants and tiny insects served as witnesses
they shouldn't come and be told which instigator gave the advice to...
equipment for washing
household implements
it has no equal
armored battalion
the death of grasshoppers is joy for crows (proverb)
he holds a towel and a soap case
technical assistance
above she wore a little shirt that was closed with buttons
his thick grass in the enclosure is now thin as thread
put in parentheses
on the bed was a parcel
water in a coconut shell is like an ocean to an ant (proverb)
the cook's signature, charcoal ink on an earthenware tile
the house is roofed with tiles
she showed her palms
forty is a dividend of ten
two or three ululations were trilled when Tegemea arrived home with Kabenga
foreign languages
he was no longer a vigorous young man nor Saada a young girl
hunchback
deformed arm
walking until the stone houses
English has become the most important international language
policy of nuclear blackmail
I pray we be informed of the motive for our pageant
they saw something frightening that made their mouths fall open
you've gotten a little boy, grandma
his voice was small with the sharpness of sarcasm
her little eye closed
the bomb ignited like a firebrand alight
he stops his arms, as though he had been stuck with a stick in his eye
a gigantic stone fell on him
you have fine gray flour
ashen cement for spattering was poured in
telephone booth
talk impudently.
the great powers
her domicile is in Tanga
they attended the youth meetings
session of the municipal council
live in a good way
fruit basket
two small boxes of pills and one of flour
girl behave like a woman.
is the chair there?
have meals in common
she quieted him with a light slap
he has a cough
insulators on a telephone pole
unintelligible words
a very old woman
a squad of soldiers
she saw a small group of a few people
he smells of perspiration
each person; each house
every city; you want every thing
club member
that onion and those potatoes
I cannot live without ever being spoken ill of (proverb)
he who laughs at a cripple will not die without becoming one himself (proverb)
disabled person
don't try to bring me over with flattery (literally, don't put a turban of grass on my head)
the fear of God is not wearing a white turban (proverb)
the tasty central part of the fruit makes the coconut sweet
when the Pleiades set in sun they rise in rain, when they set in rain they rise in sun (proverb)
proletarian internationalism
buy three kilograms of beans
its value is what amount?
what a monkey you are
yellow pigment (dye, paint)
he ordered an omelette, sliced bread, and coffee
faint
the driver of that car, a lanky woman
I <b>ran</b> to class because I was late
the tourists will <b>run away</b> when they see the lion
during the war, many Rwandans ran to Tanzania
let's avoid this storm, my child
height of a person
when she looked at the height, stature, and wholeness of that woman
the food is in the fridge
forgive me because I will explain in English
they laughed inwardly
she began to silently recite lullabies
the lights of the cars flow like fireflies
a long silence is followed by a mighty noise (proverb)
deep place in the ocean
the depths of the sea
rhyming poem
he is full
he is satiated
they ate until they were satisfied
every man likes to be with young girls
he was told that he had to move but he protested.
he was told that he had to move but he protested.
defense of his tracks
perhaps the tear was an aid
catch rainwater
<strong>collect</strong> rainwater
l <strong>protect</strong> my eyes from the sun.
<strong>log</strong> after <strong>log</strong> keeps the fire burning
Maimuna caught the hem of her dress
she talks through her nose
he has a haircut with one tuft left long
one wants to remove that old-fashioned person with his peasant habits
a new thing is a good thing even if it is a sore (proverb)
she stirred secretions and excrement into the water
a poor person has not bitterness (proverb)
she was able to converse with him without resentment
a lover has no scruples (proverb)
walk along wearily
pulling destiny from the hollow of a baby's doll
a barber does not shave himself (proverb)
with open mouth
words slide out of their mouths
early morning […] breakfasting on a mouthful of tea with nothing else
you all will listen to he who will be your <b>leader</b>
he stood in front of the mirror
I bring her from the roost where I met Aziza
he has a bad character
decaying fruit
confirmation (literally, that which gives faith)
front slope of a roof
his brow furrowed
they saw the wrinkles on her forehead rise up
he has a talent for languages
day labor
surveying instrument
his little garden with a variety of plants
this child wants to be the sort of precocious girl who ends up being a big worry to her parents
the ancient rose felt neither flies nor bees but only butterflies
the measurement of powdered milk to mix with water
this animal who lives underground is blind and eats worms and slugs
a patched garment
a patched garment
pack your belongings
clothing with a patch
non-governmental organizations
on top he was wearing a shirt
this key ring has no fewer than a dozen keys
from those lamp holders came a long wire
he pulls open the cabinet drawer
the well is full of water
his pretext was that Lulu had his letter
his major sadness followed from a lot of rage and anger
he will bring me misfortune
the man who is on the <b>island</b> is a fisherman
whoever turns the back of his head to you is not your friend (proverb)
his back and the nape of his neck had sand spread all over
I married a barbarian who I cannot appear with in front of people
cut with a knife; do whatever you want with me (literally: you are the knife and I am the meat)
I studied the <b>book</b> 'Rosa Mistika to learn Swahili.
she had her small garden
he brought out a long skinny thing that was wrapped in a white cloth
he took out his handkerchief
the moment passed
my <b>bed</b> is too hard, so I can't sleep
"In a fork of a tree, I would tie them with a noose"
an example of a riddle is, "my house has no door." the answer is, "an egg"
to do a deed like that
the familiarity between the teacher and the student grew
losses have increased, we should open our eyes
when they passed on their way to the well or the river, as a habit, they had to call hello at the door
Mr.  Maksuudi's tricks are not so small these days
small lump of rice (taken in the fingers and dipped in sauce)
I need money, so I will sell my <b>things</b>
the world and its horrors
thoughts about the terrifying events of that night
put garlic into the stew
Her <b>thirst</b> was so great, she needed water right then.
I fear to tread on God's creatures
coconut grove
the skinny waist that was no more
taking the swelling that would break her virginity
look at something in a bored way (with half-closed eyelids)
when he got some shade he lingered, beneath the tree
the skin of yesterday's sugarcane is a harvest to an ant (proverb)
"airfield, landing field".
heat-treatment plant; powdered-milk processing plant
the smile made that man confused
great fear and dismay filled her
their bodies were like chimpanzees
a native of Tanga
the present generation
she is barren (i.e., she has no offspring)
whirlpool
children's clinic
father is there at home
clap
he is wearing a red <b>cap</b>
she looked at the statue of Jesus beginning with the crown of thorns
gold necklace
to every child his own neck ornament (proverb)
paving stones
she puts the large cup above the cabinet
He was able to leave his bed and stagger a few steps outside of the hospital building.
He was able to leave his bed and totter a few steps outside of the hospital building.
He was able to leave his bed and walk unsteadily a few steps outside of the hospital building.
Stone Town (the historical old section of Zanzibar)
I hear that in their country they eat snails
"gutter, eaves, rain-spout".
"gutter, eaves, rain-spout".
"gutter, eaves, rain-spout".
but why cross East Africa seeing that right here are good educated young people?
love of patriotism is to volunteer to protect your country
the little bird lost contact and died
seaplane.
he traveled to Tanga
democratic reform.
democratic reform.
democratic reform.
democratic reform.
democratic reform.
he was agitated in any case
Idi asked deliberately but obstinately
accent (on a syllable).
accent (on a syllable).
Mix the water and the sugar.
"get back to the guard room," Yohana said
She was sentenced and put in jail.
one fault does not warrant divorce of a wife (proverb)
she cried at the poverty of lacking family
I was mistaken
how did I make a mistake when I pounded cloves and ginger
S/he opens the cupboard and takes out a coat
High Court; Appeals Court
he laughs at a scar who has received no wound (proverb)
to accept her fate
if you consent we will be rich
big city
this fellow is a confirmed drunkard
heavy rain
important person
influential person
talk in a loud voice
older brother
a regular thief
strong rain
even his nails would scratch and annoy his compatriots
he slept all night long
a mixture of limestone and sand
if you don't know death, look at the grave (proverb)
dying is bad
My heirs, according to Kimara customs and traditions, who are they?
Have you heard news <b>concerning</b> the people who will be arriving next week?
in that country; that act of explaining
right hand
the tongue hurts more than the teeth (proverb)
this city is bigger than that one
According to those stories
she has gotten bupkiss
She remembered the wounds that she saw on the bodies of the prisoners.
Do you all remember when Jomo Kenyatta was the president of Kenya?
he groped about in the darkness of memory
she tried to chase those recollections from her head
he decided that my younger brother should be named "Furaha" so as to be a reminder of that happy period
We reminded them so that they wouldn't forget.
nine is near ten (proverb)
the tenth month (i.e., October)
there are coconut palms on the farm
the man who she brought here groped her or scratched her
what's the matter?  (what is there going on?)
dwarf
he who who aims a rock at a flock (of birds) does not know the one it hits (proverb)
herd of cattle
swarm of bees
the carrier of a secret message is not told its meaning (proverb)
hem a garment
trim a garment
those who drink wine and stimulants
we were bitten by bedbugs while we slept
chop firewood
One leg did not have a shoe and she had bent the other.
We have assembled these people.
When the fisherman <b>collect</b> the fish, they will sell them at the market.
She woke up and gathered the few things that were hers.
Finally they gathered at the door of Ms Tamina.
Thousands of Muslims assembled in mosques all over the city of Mombasa.
They are the ones who have the full intention of putting their lives in great danger.
everything that we intended
the detective found himself in a large room with a bed
he came upon that bedbug as it continued to suck blood
she will <b>meet</b> the president when he visits her school
they <b>met</b> in the street, and they talked for twenty minutes
the coconut leaves on the roof gleam
he continued to read in a menacing voice
day after tomorrow
Because every one of us knows the importance of this work ...
Bahati already felt that Idi was angry
Her instructor teaches her a great deal as she grows up
to respect and develop the culture
home of the uncle
according to their opinions
they ran because of fear
travel by car
they arrived at the home of the teacher
go to the home of somebody
talk by means of a telephone
travel for three years
go to somebody
write with a pen
Sir, Why are you scolding us like this?
his/her thing
his/her thing
in your heart
The travellers were stranded in the city that day.
be sure that the cutting gets as close as possible to the origin of the branch axil [How to Prune Trees, US Dept.  of Agriculture]
my friend, my mother
she saw me first
I didn't like him at first, but later we became friends
a rough, stony road (one with many impediments)
their shops
he is going back to their place
he who is chased away from home has no where to go (proverb)
The dress that was her school uniform she wrapped in her head scarf and carried it under her arm.
Do you see the airplane by means of which we'll cross the ocean?
"Really, in bed is the appropriate place for a person with problems".
he who is chased away from home has nowhere to go (methali)
your house
Matika returned to her mother in the kitchen (while) sobbing; She turns to the other side and begins to sob.
I have <b>eat</b>en the beef that I bought at the store.
S/he has the curse of his/her parents.
So as to remove oneself from sin and damnation
S/he has the curse of his/her parents.
He cursed and fought with his wife.
Her chapatis have a very good <b>flavor</b>.
Swahili poems have a sweet taste that endures because they are composed in different dialects of Swahili.
she was able to recognize from his accent that that man is from Jamaica
people who speak all languages or all dialects ...; when he composes he uses the Swahili dialect that is spoken where he lives.
said the teacher, his excuse has changed again
Don't you even feel shame at cheating on me completely openly?
People who speak all languages or dialects ...
The Honored One of wonders, appropriate for every praise.
It's necessary to follow the line.
after the inspection the suspect was found with seven hundred thousand shillings in his pocket
he went to meet them as though they weren't his students
when she was eating she was used to licking her fingers
an empty hand is not licked (proverb)
Diana blames herself for waking that man; you are blaming the hawk, while the falcon is killing the chickens (proverb)
It's useless for you to blame us.
The work of human beings is criticism and slander
We are not running the risk of writing on those matters.
We are not taking the responsibility of writing on those matters.
So as to reduce the expense of providing accomodations for athletes when they come to Dar es Salaam ...
It was necessary for him to stay there in the village and try to use his education in order to live.
those people
The parents raised four children.
the Labour Party
The explanations that follow have been provided to focus on this objective.
I will <b>bring</b> the food to the table right away.
Bring some coffee.
Lete kahawa.
Matika returned to her mother in the kitchen and here she cried by sobbing.
In addition to mangrove trees, Lamu also is known for its forests.
They returned to their large homes for their vacations; your vacation has three days remaining.
that orange and those mangoes
his guards guarded the chief where ever he went.
They began to build a large fort in order to protect the entrance to the harbor.
If the votes are equal then the ballots begin to be counted again.
There were receipts of payments.
today our country America is feeding Russians with wheat
she named those who oathed her and those who took the oath with her.
the goats are grazing in the field
If a death occurs, for example, s/he will compose a poem for the bereaved to comfort them.
The sorcerer that <b>bewitch</b>ed them was in the forest.
Yesterday, two trucks that carry mail were at the post office at 2:30 p.m.
cover with a damp cloth
s/he may, as long as s/he is diligent.
We have done this to save you from failure, as now you don't have work or anything.
I was watching horror and grief
Colors are God's design, not a sign of misfortune
It's best for us to follow the teacher's instructions.
Heroes Day today is a special day; a special charter; specialist, expert
Is Saidi coming today?  Definitely
he does not come here regularly
specialist, expert; Special prayers
Is Saidi coming today?  Definitely
He does not come here regularly
he was unable even to build a decent house
because your fellow Swahili people will laugh at you
I don't understand the meaning of this word
those alarming things within that reason really were tough
preparations for a meeting
The preliminary preparations have been made and the completion will begin within a year.
egg doughnut
linguistics
Mangrove trees and fish are important in Lamu.
an inveterate listener to a radio
Hurry up!  (lit.  Don't walk like a bride and bridegroom)
show off
He is conceited
People fear bats believing that they are harmful.
Thus I have explained in brief some of our customs.
basic priniciple
It is essential for the OAU to look for firm ways to end this dispute
The door itself was not very strong.
The aim of her/his letter was to ask for money.
He has a bad cold.
Put the oil in a frying pan.
southwest
revolution
revolution
revolution
This dance for a girl coming of age is usually danced in the evening in the city or in the rural areas.
All is the love of God, our colors are not stigmas; love is neither a bridge nor a rope; there is no cure for love
we'll disagree even if we end up in court
everywhere
everywhere
everywhere
everywhere
everywhere
everywhere
everywhere
everywhere
I married this woman without paying dowry.
""They have brought the bridewealth, the clan of Mbukwasemwali, and we have decided to accept this bridewealth".
I married this woman without paying dowry.
disarmament
disarmament
cornmeal
cornmeal
ancestor worship
"Don't believe what he says, he is a wag/joker".
Don't eat my fruit without paying.
Don't eat my fruit without paying.
Don't eat my fruit without paying.
gelding
exhibitors came especially to do exhibitions
as of now, fifty-four people have died in the accident, and others are in critical condition
a serious illness
Mainland Tanzania has an area of 362,688 square miles.
armed intervention
armed intervention
armed intervention
Before foreign rule, that is before the intrusion of the Germans and the British ...
They are the ones with the full intention of putting their lives in great danger; I will live here forever (my whole life)
I will live here forever (my whole life)
he couldn't understand what it was in particular that was being headed toward
After long debate between the elders of these families it seemed as if Matika would be suitable for marriage to Njasulu.
when I was thirsty, I drank <b>water</b>
it was the afternoon period; for a period of about an hour and a half, that corridor was filled with people
my watch is not keeping good time
this condition changes according to the seasons.
clock-time
my watch is not keeping good time
The way he walks shows that he is arrogant
Those days of grief under German rule ...
be sad
why was it claimed recently that some matatu vehicles increased fares during the Easter holiday?
look at this short article about love
I don't want to make you sad at this age.
Who is the Vice-President of Kenya?
He dialed the number of detective headquarters.
squinting eyes
He is heavy (and strong)
thick cloth
I don't eat another person's crumbs
grant pardon
My suit is finished; now I have to pay for it.
Grades are given independently of the grader.
They went to the <b>library</b> to seek out books for their Swahili class.
I realized that our protests and claims needed to be strengthened and clarified.
sleeping sickness, encephalitis
accommodation tax
The Swahili community respects their master poets.
all child molesters are cursed
This child is a good-for-nothing
export goods
You don't need <b>wealth</b> to be happy.
And the design of the things of the world
Malindi is a city on the Kenya coast
Each village had its borders and its grasslands and pastures.
pay/settle a debt
pay/settle a debt
completely consume a meal
many people have fallen victim to the disease
pay/settle a debt
many people have fallen victim to the disease
Chonya had finished his primary school studies.
completely consume a meal
to complete sentences
Usually voting begins at 8 am and is completed at 6 pm.
This child is a good-for-nothing
my mother
What's up?  Things are cool!
Neo-colonialism
Neo-colonialism
For every soldier, where ever he is, there must be hundreds of citizens ...
self-government
self-rule
whether you come or not is immaterial to me
whether you come or not is one and the same thing.
Nunga was able to enjoy the beauty of the views that surrounded him
We are going on an excursion
We are going on an excursion
We are going on an excursion
southwest
House taxes are paid at the municipal administration offices.
House taxes are paid at the municipal administration offices.
House taxes will be paid at the municipal administration offices
House taxes are paid at the municipal administration offices.
House taxes are paid at the municipal administration offices.
flotilla, squadron
flotilla, squadron
flotilla, squadron
flotilla, squadron
flotilla, squadron
flotilla, squadron
"It is the responsibility of the Party, the Government, and of every person, to help them be able to be useful citizens to the full extent of their capabilities".
The fort was attacked by British man-of-wars.
Bats have light weight furry bodies.
We write letters to make requests.
forgiveness of sins
begin a conversation
begin a conversation; We must end this conversation of ours.
God's providence
It is our opinion that this fiance is unsuitable for you.
public opinion
farming demonstrations
charity exhibitions
farming exhibitions
triplets
In the contest between the two teams Brazil will defeat Chile
In the match between the two teams Brazil will defeat Chile
The struggle continues
conclude an alliance
compromise
per capita income
Doing business in coconut is not profitable
early in the morning
If s/he loves someone and wants a friendship with him/her s/he will write him/her a love poem.
cash, ready money
class struggle
1.  Women are not turning back, we want a revolution; To have coaxed them would have meant delaying the revolution.

2.  CCM is the shortened form of The Party of the Revolution.

2.  CCM ni kifupi cha Chama cha Mapinduzi.
"There is only one rice, but there are various ways of cooking it".
"There is only one rice, but there are various ways of cooking it".
during the Easter vacation.
once
once
once
right angle.
perpendicular lines
peanut brittle
perpendicular lines
perpendicular lines
cattle epidemic
light rain, drizzle
light rain, drizzle
light rain, drizzle
light rain, drizzle
light rain, drizzle
She took some spray-on perfume, lipstick, a small mirror, and some powder
cattle epidemic
It is not long enough
It is not long enough
It is not long enough
since it was built by his late father
The detective investigated inside a wide and stylish sitting room.
my wife is charming
my wife is modest
my wife is nice
my wife is polite
my wife is unassuming
my wife is unpretentious
red coral
These people are my contemporaries
These people are my contemporaries
shotgun
the gold faucet dripped in the marble basin
she looked like a statue of white marble, perfectly and beautifully sculpted
It is prohibited to show any signs of racial discrimination.
Smoking is prohibited here
Smoking is prohibited here
political (religious) questions.
write poetry
write poetry
write poetry
write poetry
write poetry
write poetry
Middle East
obligatory prayers
large piece of the father who has the moustache of a scorpion
football competition
to take the first place in the awaited competition
football competition
mechanical
His hands worked like a machine.
typewriter
the bottles were in the refrigerator
mechanical
typewriter
procure charges.
modern dresses
modern dresses
modern dresses
modern dresses
modern dresses
modern dresses
modern dresses
modern dresses
procure charges
go for a walk
go for a walk
signs of the rainy season are beginning to appear
Grandfather began his narration.
This fiance doesn't think about your interests but just about his own.
"Don't believe what he says, he is a wag/joker".
ancestor worship
"speak with foreign accent, speak a language with the accent of one's mother tongue".
"speak with foreign accent, speak a language with the accent of one's mother tongue".
"spreader of lies, gossip, talebearer".
where they are mourning, someone has died (proverb)
He walks proudly to the outside door.
My brother you have problems, I cannot understand them.
the people of Nairobi travel by minibuses
The girl swallowed saliva.
tourism.
Suitable tests are those that measure, for example vocabulary, comprehension, etc.
If a death occurs, for example, s/he will compose a poem for the bereaved to comfort them.
muddy water
stale water
temper (metal, by heating)
ruffled hair
unruly hair
Emphasize the most appropriate use of punctuation; the building will be able to protect many Government documents for subsequent uses.
The girl tried to get up but her pain prevented her from doing so.
Matika was larger than Chonya in terms of physique.
fever made all her limbs cold
death overtook him on the way.
The bad part of the past is forgotten.  (lit.  : the offal of the past does not smell)
eating is sweet, digging is weariness (proverb)
The hunter's child followed his father to the hunting grounds.
clouds are the sign of rain (proverb)
be sad
be sad
be sad
The difficulties that he has are the result of his folly.
Children should do many letter writing exercises that concern their surroundings.
curdled milk
Jim was extravagant, a lover of luxury and of the sweet life
tonight there was moonlight
far from
Because Kiswahili has more than enough words completely on its own ...
far from
far from
far from
far from
I have known about this matter for a long time.
I have known about this matter for a long time.
far from
mbono/kokwa ya mbarika
commentator (on religious matters)
St.  John the Baptist.
sow
in front of me.
bourgeois hangers-on.
two houses
well-shaped arm (leg).
For every soldier who is in the front lines, there must be other soldiers here behind supervising transport, sending and receiving communications, and planning attack strategies.
v tranplant seeds
to dive
caster-oil
In this war they have been ready to sleep in watery places with mosquitos and huge snakes.
wild animal
Each village had its borders and its grasslands and pastures [Masomo 309]
entering the gardens of paradise
If there is a winner who is recognized as such without an problem then it is announced that this person is the member of parliament.
track of a snake
track of a snake
she dragged herself into the kitchen and threw herself on top of the coconut grater
the hair itself was not from a cow nor a goat
and they came across a rabbit, and sent a dog to chase it
to belch.
If they are not God-fearing ...
international crisis.
good afternoon
Each policeman was able to get for himself more than one young wife.
granulated sugar.
granulated sugar.
grain of sand.
Matata made a major contribution toward making him a trusted athlete
to depend upon people's donations
My brother was bewitched by the sorcerer who stays in this village.
millet grain.
he who is nervous about the crying of a child will cry himself (proverb)
dancer
dancer
he does this only for the fun of it.
he does this only for the fun of it.
he does this only for the fun of it.
football game
Ebrahim Hussein is a famous playright
"miner, mine worker".
"miner, mine worker".
"miner, mine worker".
Asumini was a complete bundle of nerves
warmonger.
warmonger.
warmonger.
warmonger.
The preliminary matches of the World Cup.
Take the meat out of the sauce.
As soon as she saw the glasses her lips opened.
put meat in one's mouth.
double-barrelled gun.
Bats eat insects
The drumbeat becomes increasingly enjoyable.
football game.
kind of imported rice.
cabin
There are both good and evil in the world.
movie director.
movie director.
movie director.
peel manioc (potatoes).
peel manioc (potatoes).
peel manioc (potatoes).
muskrat
they could see the ocean when it sparkled in the sun
use proverbs in a conversation.
the girl hesitated, swallowed saliva, and said in a deep voice, "I don't know them" [Masomo 167]; she swallows the pills and throws herself on the couch
we sat at the <b>table</b> to eat dinner
The ruler of Mombasa killed the Portuguese general by stabbing him and seized the Fort.
My brother who went to Kenya saw many animals, <b>for example</b> elephants and giraffes.
worker
"worker",
worker
if he sees it has a profit, great
Panama Canal
when will you get running water in this house?
range of a bullet
The potter commonly eats off potsherds.
if a death occurs, for example, she will compose a poem for the bereaved to comfort them
the mourner begins the wailing, later others join (proverb)
dry torrent bed
"surf, breakers".
"surf, breakers".
goldsmith (silversmith)
goldsmith (silversmith)
"surf, breakers".
They were charged with being Mau Mau partisans.
they bought livestock to secure life in their old age
she took her notebook bag
when he put his hand in the pocket of his pants
stand and turn around more than twenty times successively
the blows went unceasingly until blood came from her nose
lined/ruled paper
a plain door (without carving or ornamentation)
simple mat
he must be fresh and unpretentious among many city things
vacuum cleaner
we were not drinking coffee in the <b>cafe</b>
she ate at the <b>restaurant</b> that was in Dar es Salaam
the sick boys were taken to be healed by a <b>doctor</b> at the hospital.
a witchdoctor does not cure himself (proverb)
dividend.
dividend.
pharmacist/druggist.
pharmacist/druggist.
dividend.
dividend.
"If the maker of palm wine is praised for his wine, he adds water to it".
"If the maker of palm wine is praised for his wine, he adds water to it".
current guests
32 visitors from 17 countries
democratic reform.
democratic reform.
democratic reform.
democratic reform.
democratic reform.
candidate in an election.
candidate in an election.
candidate in an election.
candidate in an election.
candidate in an election.
candidate in an election.
go-slow
go-slow
It's essential that we act in accordance with what is wanted by the family, whether it's good or bad so that we can live without conflicts and disturbances.
The banging of the pestle and the clapping is very pleasing msichana anayefikia hali ya kuwa mtu mzima [Masomo 130]
camel's hump
lie on one's back.
I think the <b>sick person</b> will recover soon.
Dissatisfaction spreads when people feel hunger pains
an aimless wanderer wears away his feet (proverb)
he could not run fast because he had only one <b>leg</b>.
He is asking the unobtainable of me.
If a lawbreaker appeared, he was punished very forcefully; Two lawbreakers who were buryed alive.
The people with one purpose were willing to sacrifice themselves.
cleaning up the mess of his anxiety
American Indian
government seal
this document is not valid because it does not have the official stamp
S/he is yawning
I am not ready to converse with a person who is guided by a bird, I myself.
eternal life
I cannot see another woman possessing you.
procure abortion.
"germinate, sprout".
"germinate, sprout".
Who is the girl who got pregnant without being married?; the five month pregnancy that she has now; the first pregnancy of Tamina she gave birth to at home.
this book is mine
break the egg slowly and pour it into the frying pan [Masomo 16]
There were crowds of people at the assembly.
There were crowds of people at the assembly.
balance of forces
balance of forces
He, along with many others, was not fortunate enough to enter Form One of secondary school.
one who exacts retribution.
rare: law of inheritance.
rare: law of inheritance.
rare: law of inheritance.
celebration of the mass.
use proverbs in a conversation.
use proverbs in a conversation.
missionary school
missionary school
muskrat
Moses led the Israelites from Egypt to Caanan.
use proverbs in a conversation.
use proverbs in a conversation.
similar to a short story
combination of numbers.
to whistle.
on top of the small cupboard there were glasses with thick lenses and large black frames
Therefore a poet is a sheikh or a pastor who sermonizes to people.
av.  test pilot.
av.  test pilot.
to whip
where there are plenty of trees there are no builders (proverb)
more than a million Germans gathered on the streets of the capital city of Berlin for the New Year's celebration
Tegemea's compound was finished
capital city
Tegemea's homestead was finished
her cloth had a white background
These are foolish people.
Many of us are great thieves.
government representative.
government representative.
government representative.
University of Dar es Salaam
Mansuri himself was not a regular occupant of his home
"facing, opposite, contrasting".
farm inspector
farm inspector.
farm inspector.
inspection of a school
farm inspector.
an obstinate child does not suffer save on the feast day after Ramadhan (proverb)
he knew he was following a stubborn man
atheist.
atheist.
hydraulic press.
camphor tree.
After the first World War the British ruled our country by a special charter.
pressed/plug tobacco.
The cruel people drove them away.
shortcut.
resolute words.
resolute words.
resolute words.
shortcut.
shortcut.
There are buses that provide service to the residents.
accent (on a syllable).
accent (on a syllable).
While he waited for the Inspector he took out his pack of cigarettes, took out one, and lit up.
"lines of embroidery on a kanzu, proceeding from the mjusi".
be last.
"insane person, madman, lunatic".
"insane person, madman, lunatic".
"insane person, madman, lunatic".
Amin is now a refugee.
If I resembled a cuttle fish.
These are ethnic groups like the Masai, the Tindiga and the Hadza who live in Arusha, Singida and Shinyanga provinces.
The robbers tried to steal her <b>purse</b>, but she hit them, and they ran away.
urinate.
urinate.
if you want to buy mangrove in quantity or fish, go to Lamu
a bunch of coconuts.
a bunch of coconuts.
bed of a river.
the track of the lion.
I extended my hand to greet him when I introduced myself
handle of a pan
S/he wore a gold necklace.
My poem is good for wearing as an ornamental chain of flowers or of precious metal.
A farmer with a farm
this third pregnancy does not have a midwife or a doctor
"one who makes faces, clown".
"one who makes faces, clown".
trousers with a pressed crease.
party leader.
in the evening at the assembly of people
Often matters and disputes or disagreements were resolved in celebrations and a meeting of the clan.
press conference
the current session of the OAU.
that woman has been chosen to be the head of the committee
Those brave leaders liberated them.
the president of the company knows the names of all his employees
you may quarrel with your family or your in-laws
usurer
usurer
about ten steps from the door of his house
inside that pocket
Every worker must help these soldiers with disabilities to do their work.
Because we are both studying, we both should be childcare providers.
volcano
The people are the same whether they eat flatbread or wholewheat bread.
He was not just a ruler but a protector of the peace and the customs of the nation.
bowsprit.
soldier on patrol; on the front line
Komenjue was the leader and protector of the Meru people.
rifle shot.
lowing of cattle.
lowing of cattle.
rifle shot.
lowing of cattle.
It is eaten with a serving of any type of food made from grain.
first decade
decimal arithmetic
he is one of them
The evil settler government denied us justice.
American dollars
each (and every) one.
each (and every) one
auction off.
auction off.
"one who calls to prayer, muezzin".
Mount Kilimanjaro is an African landmark
"popular speaker, demagogue".
shining/pierching eyes.
dentist.
doorkeeper
doorkeeper
doorkeeper
doorkeeper
doorkeeper
doorkeeper
doorkeeper
doorkeeper
doorkeeper
doorkeeper
s/he gushed with rumors.
Since the distant past that bird has grasped people's whispers and has begun to insult uncivilized people like me.
armed insurrection.
armed uprising
She was weak with pains in her bones.
bicycle-chain.
bicycle-chain.
[Diana ] is a drinker who doesn't become drunk quickly.
my money is there in my pocket
The people are the same whether they eat flatbread or wholewheat bread.
wear elegant clothes.
wear fashionable clothes.
wear modern clothes.
wear stylish clothes.
day on which boys bathe for the first time after circumcision.
people are not all alike
a certain person.
eleven.
harmony (literary one heart)
Letters are one of the things that are very important in our everyday life.
"calf, heifer".
Anger overwhelmed me and I ran to the telephone.
"recent, pol.  smokescreen".
where there is smoke there is fire.
First I must go, secondly....
Saturday
motor scooter.
He decided to look for that motorboat so as to escape from that place.
"bus, taxi".
"bus, taxi".
in all the houses.
in the entire house.
in the whole house
burning coals
without current.
hard/taxing work.
glowing coals.
hot water.
light/kindle a fire
"bus, taxi".
"bus, taxi".
without courage and this response, we would not have been able to fight and win this war
core at the top of the coconut tree (favored as a delicacy).
this one is his favorite
God is the giver.
God is the giver.
She will not be in her office <b>until</b> 10:45; until when/ how long
Amin announced completely arbitrarily that he had changed the borders; With respect to fishing the place that is most highly regarded is that between Kipini and the border of Kenya and Somalia.
it was a little outside the village boundaries
plasterer
plastering
typesetter.
typesetter.
wild papaya (Melochia melissifolia)
wild papaya (Melochia melissifolia)
"scribbler, poor writer".
"one who saws boards, sawmill worker".
atomic bomb explosion.
atomic bomb explosion.
atomic bomb explosion.
myrtle tree (Jambosa vulgaris)
His eyes didn't see anyone nor a car nearby.  Thus the detective knew that Othman Omari had not returned.
glutton; a lover of luxury.
glutton.
glutton.
He wants to marry his darling.
myrtle tree (Jambosa vulgaris)
this person is no longer a child but an adult
photographer
There must be hundreds of citizens who concern themselves with making shoes and clothing for the soldiers, and food for the fighters, ...
black-pepper plant (Piper nigrum).
pol.  reactionary.
Matata's palm groped in search of the underpants' elastic band
her hand twisted a rubber band into the braid; a rubber doll
sea coast.
tax collector
tax collector
tax collector
tax collector
tax collector
tax collector
stonemason.
stonemason
one who squanders property (money).
one who squanders property (money).
one who squanders property (money)
one who squanders property (money).
one who squanders property (money).
one who squanders property (money)
one who squanders property (money).
one who squanders property (money).
one who squanders property (money)
sea coast.
This person is foolish/stupid/mentally defective.
This person is foolish/stupid/mentally defective.
right angle.
perpendicular lines
peanut brittle
peanut brittle
peanut brittle
perpendicular lines
perpendicular lines
because s/he is sleeping you shouldn't wake him/her.
"Since he is asleep, do not wake him up".
Now s/he is a teacher and has fulfilled her/his goal.
The projects that are completed are the construction of civil servants' housing.
matchlock gun.
"sprinkle, drizzle (of rain)".
"sprinkle, drizzle (of rain)".
commission business.
commission business.
Haiba is more beautiful than any other girl
the first Portuguese person to arrive in Mombasa was Vasco da Gama in 1498
the parts of the coastal littoral that are close to the center of the country
My heirs, according to Kimara customs and traditions, who are they?
financial aid
political (religious) questions.
I met a big crowd of people coming from the football game.
latrine cleaner.
Grades are given independently of the grader.
vice-chairman
He went, wherever he went, even to the bathroom, in his bare feet.
go to the toilet.
sign of the Cross.
The guest is using the bathroom.
the teacher is in the lavatory
Their ancestor brought them abundance and forgiveness for the sins they committed.
The Kiswahili Council has continued to produced new word-lists.
blacksmith
blacksmith.
In addition to being a verbal artists a Swahili poet is a protector of Swahili culture.
His surprises and amazements, He is the greatest artist.
This table is not smooth (has not been well sanded)
The speaker at this meeting.
The speaker at this meeting.
Their spokesman.
Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi has resigned and is preparing to form a new right-wing coalition government
He is an enthusiast of playing cards
A Swahili poet has many reasons to compose poetry.
They grabbed bows and arrows to drive out the strangers; poisoned arrow.
ray of sunlight.
the watch hand that was shining in the dark showed 3 o'clock.
Here she is showing amazement,
business partner
business partner
legal counsel
government delegate.
government representative
oblique line
nondescript person.
an uncivilized person; Since the distant past that bird has grasped people's whispers and has begun to insult uncivilized people like me.
uncouth person
"sport, rare: referee, umpire".
"sport, rare: referee, umpire".
the count of the vote and the announcement of the winner
the noise of people in a crowd.
the trample of horses.
the noise of people in a crowd.
"neuralgia, sciatica".
the pulse beats.
business partner
business partner
business partner
business partner
"tailor, dressmaker".
shoemaker
shoemaker
sunset
We extend great sympathy to their families and join with them in this grief; be overcome by grief.
be overcome by great sadness.
"toady, sycophant, lickspittle".
we went to the <b>mosque</b> to pray
the voting supervisor
As I see it you understand my position, or don't you, my husband?
now is the mango-harvesting period.
now is the mango-harvesting season.
<b>Reporters</b> ask questions and write articles.
lay the cornerstone/foundation.
primary school
lay the cornerstone/foundation.
reader of a newspaper.
drive (pull out) a nail.
drive (pull out) a peg.
drive (pull out) a pin.
one who presses forward.
The wanted to reduce the crowd of passengers,
one who presses forward.
Absolute repose/comfort.
Absolute repose/comfort.
Absolute repose/comfort.
"poke, nudge".
mat-weaver
(women's) hairdresser.
mat-weaver
(women's) hairdresser.
(women's) hairdresser.
(women's) hairdresser.
It's essential that we act in accordance with what is wanted by the family, whether it's good or bad so that we can live without conflicts and disturbances.
drive (pull out) a peg.
drive (pull out) a pin.
to saw.
(women's) hairdresser.
(women's) hairdresser.
live in the same part of town (be neighbors)
he had to pass through the Vibyongoni neighborhood, a neighborhood that was built on the slope of a hill
Many European experts did not have an opportunity to know the truth about African life and civilization.
astute writer.
finger-print specialists; Geography specialists say that the world is round.
meteorologist.
general council
general council
to scratch.
"We live in a world of competition for everything, in competition to attract capital and investments, competition for employment, and business competition." Benjamin William Mkapa, 1 May 2001.
he who asks for everything receives nothing (proverb)
The <b>tourist</b> did not visit Tanzania.
where there are many chickens one should not spill sorghum
heifer.
works of a watch/clock; refrigerator.
radio transmitter.
lock/action of a gun.
"spreader of lies, gossip, talebearer".
The <b>reporter</b> wrote a story about the market that was being built by the residents of the village.
He can't be angry; he is my mtani)
The Portuguese themselves thought of themselves more as spreaders of Christianity than as representatives of Portugal.
We wrote letters to people in positions of authority
"autocrat, absolute monarch".
The Europeans who were here, whether they were rulers, missionaries or settlers, never made an effort to understand Africans.
"autocrat, absolute monarch".
"autocrat, absolute monarch".
"autocrat, absolute monarch".
"autocrat, absolute monarch".
Chache looks at the audience members.
lay mines.
"water carrier, one who draws water".
he travels a great deal
street walker
rare: worker.
hard worker
hard worker.
"dismissal, discharge (from a position/job)".
"dismissal, discharge (from a position/job)".
"dismissal, discharge (from a position/job)".
"bring to a boil, parboil".
earthquake
earthquake
earthquake
earthquake
earthquake
earthquake
earthquake
earthquake
earthquake
telephone pole
dry wood
painter
painter
painter
painter
get into a difficult situation
when she passed her test from grade four
Their child is obedient
These clothes are of the same quality as those.
His trousers had been cut following the "beach-comber"style.
The answer to all of these issues is to use new ways to compose questions; The way to do things today, is for people to do them together as equals.
editor/publisher of newspaper.
"pharmacist, druggist".
editor of a newspaper.
the fourth day from today.
This is a person who shows too little respect (where it is due).
tax-collector.
man or woman.
man or woman
the people of this country.
the population of this country.
nobody is there.
No one is there.
the Most High.
a load of cloth.
diplomatic courier.
fireman (on a locomotive)
The projects that are completed are the construction of civil servants' housing.
Come quickly!  His wife has been killed and his servant has been very badly wounded
fireman (on a locomotive)
poet.
poet.
poet.
poet.
poet.
poet.
easy
its skillful composition
a string of fish.
treasurer.
treasurer.
discarded clothing.
a thief is a rogue, but the one who repays is a gentleman (proverb)
In the west of Tanzania ...
Truly being in bed is the appropriate place for a person with problems.
a period of four hours
planning for the longer-term
wear elegant clothes.
wear fashionable clothes.
wear modern clothes.
wear stylish clothes.
He is asking the unobtainable of me.
conspectus (of study).
"program, schedule (of studies)".
There are cypress trees in Lungi forest.
blacksmith.
blacksmith.
in accordance with the law
according to the law
the one who gives you light by day will burn you by night [proverb]
a husband of a mother is a father (proverb)
But you are lucky
comm.  hammer and sickle.
House taxes are paid at the municipal administration offices.
House taxes are paid at the municipal administration offices.
House taxes are paid at the municipal administration offices.
House taxes are paid at the municipal administration offices.
House taxes will be paid at the municipal administration offices
Because all of us are studying, we should both be childcare providers.
Komenjue, the Meru leader, resembled Moses
this complaint is giving me trouble.
this complaint is giving me trouble.
now is the mango-harvesting period.
now is the mango-harvesting season.
The fort now sits in the sun in a condition of calm.
Absolute repose/comfort.
Absolute repose/comfort.
Absolute repose/comfort.
conspectus (of study).
"program, schedule (of studies)".
in accordance with the law.
according to the law.
shipbuilder
shipbuilder
shipbuilder
shipbuilder
structures of sentences
United States of America.
On this day every year we remember how heroes who put themselves forward to fight with invaders from outside countries or strangers who wanted to rule our country.
gray-haired person.
the wine ferments after sitting in the air for a few days
geography experts say that the world is round
a ball is spherical
blow/work bellows
it is raining
The average yearly rainfall is approximately 40 inches.
blow/work bellows.
The humming of the rain.
The rumbling of the rain.
The rustling of the rain.
The humming of the rain.
The roar of the police car siren was audible from far away.
The rumbling of the rain.
The rustling of the rain.
Space under a table (bed).
Stonemason.
Lawbreaker.
blow/work bellows.
Her/his poems please everyone who reads them because of their attractiveness [Khan, Masomo 395]
idolator.
After the meeting the people broke up
After the meeting the people dispersed
After the meeting the people scattered.
Spilled water cannot be picked up (e.g., something once said cannot be retracted.)
Our gods generously gave us good fortune [Masomo 304]
his child
They are representatives of their companions who have already gone home.
a small lamp with a weak flame
yours in yours (each to his own)
The daughter had become a young woman.
The teacher is helping the students to understand their studies
This person does not trust/have confidence in anybody else.
President Nyerere is among the courageous people who stood up for freedom and the leaders who began the OAU in 1963.
and she froze like a fish who had left the coral
In the region along the coast of Kenya and Tanzania ...
coastal shipping
coastal shipping.
The last days of the month (before payday).
The person who is asked for assistance must be trustworthy.
parachute
parachute
illegitimate child; a single hand can not nurse a child (proverb)
He is a member of a labor union.
Therefore a poet is a sheikh or a pastor who sermonizes to people even though he is not a religious specialist having an in-depth knowledge of his religion.
The carpentry apprentice is using a hammer
The pupil is reading her book in class
The student is reading his book in class
Tamima began to cry loudly, although she was not a woman bearing her first child
I am an AIDS activist.
So as to reduce the expense of providing accomodations for athletes when they come to Dar es Salaam ...
Para-military forces are everywhere.
Tanzania has many people who are in local militia.
the destroyer of a country is a citizen of that country (proverb)
political refugee
Who was the writer of this letter?
We are always very happy when a relative or someone to whom we've written has received a letter and has understood what we meant.
cursive writing.
Secretary General.
The light dims slowly.
The book brought a new clarity and helped to open the eyes of Europeans concerning Africa.
receive enlightenment.
my friends
gap between the teeth.
gap between the teeth.
The door was not closed completely.  There was a small opening that enabled the detective to investigate inside.
The small bat lives in the bamboo.
nostril.
nostril.
One who kindles the fire.
One who lights the fire.
One who turns on fire.
It rained some and she covered herself with her umbrella
He makes noise like a madman.
treasurer
treasurer
treasurer
poor sick person, Bibi Msimu
parachute
parachute
pedestrian
pedestrian.
pedestrian
You have become like a mentally ill person my husband.
car driver
the behavior I wanted for her my wife should have; he who talks like a child is not one who understands the behavior of the universe
he learns well but his conduct is bad
a day's march
he follows all the movements of his hunting
speed up one's pace
this ship's speed is 30 miles per hour
publicity-man; public-relations man.
publicity-man; public-relations man.
publicity-man; public-relations man.
publicity-man; public-relations man.
publicity-man; public-relations man.
publicity-man; public-relations man.
fig.  sunlight.
their thing
the home owner calls for permission to enter
shopkeeper
why does the salary of a person with a certain degree differ from that person with another degree?
The <b>residents</b> told them a story about the history of their village.
S/he has been chosen as the new chairperson.
owner of a house (ship).
I have seen him myself.
You shouldn't go the wrong way and go against God; if people begin to lose their religious faith he will not hesitate to warn them that they should return to God,
owner of a house (ship).
your friend
his friend.
my friend.
It's a mistake to ask your friend for whom s/he voted.
ruler of a country.
month of thirty days
new moon
barbed wire.
sting of a bee.
food taboo
observe (break) a taboo.
bats have light bodies
The hunters entered the forest; The hunter's child followed his father to the hunting grounds.
Elevated places
owner of a house (ship).
Without courage and this response we would not have been able to fight and win this war.
respond to a call.
reply to summons; A child must greet his/her elder respectfully and must respond to any summons if called or sent (to do something) [Masomo 310].
wild animal.
"dense forest, jungle".
day on which boys bathe for the first time after circumcision.
first decade
decimal arithmetic
he is one of them
convert.
responsible leader.
Your opinions, although not always, have been a good guide in my life.
Among the exhibitors there were groups from far away.
in all the houses.
in the entire house.
in the whole house
Herod … was hoping to see Jesus perform a miracle [Luke 23:8]
It was while Marko was sleeping that significant remarkable things took place.
Two remarkable geographical features on the continent of Africa are Mount Kilimanjaro and the Great Rift Valley.
shipbuilder
shipbuilder
according to pattern
according to pattern
United States of America.
United States of America.
great grandmother.
wild grapevine
deride someone
"joke, tease".
nickname; We were amused by their joke.
laugh at someone.
A poet is also a patriot.
he is someone born here
the author Joseph Conrad was a native of Poland although he moved to England
pearl-diver.
they went into the room of the woman in childbirth
load of merchandise
fireman
Every clan had a god and their ancestor whom the worshiped.
fire a cannon
beehive.
lay the cornerstone/foundation.
rare: puzzle
rare: puzzle
coll.  the root of the trouble.
when we ate the roots of trees
experienced seafarer
experienced seafarer
experienced seafarer
experienced seafarer
It is essential for the OAU to look for firm ways to end this dispute.
be astonished/embarrassed/nonplussed.
his surprises and marvels, God is the greatest artist
someone who distorts words.
someone who twists words.
He really loves his mother and father.
The book was written by Shaaban Robert.
he had money
This woman will travel with her child.
He took a trip to Tanga but did not find his friend.
he has no choice.
The bedroom also was not tidy.
take an oath.
keep a vow.
It is unusual to see him/her sitting quietly when something happens.
It is eaten with a serving of any type of grain.
My father said: "Take the <b>chance</b> and go to university!"
she looked for a day with an opportunity to visit Subira
to grab the first place in the competition that was waited for
Ruzuna wanted him to take the possibility of work
And Rehema got the space to heal herself
They thought of themselves
They thought of themselves
I myself.
"If something falls out of the (heavy) basket, that is a benefit to the carrier".
He is improving/getting better.
He is improving/getting better.
Prov.  A ship with many captains is likely to sink (=Many cooks spoil the broth).
The beginning of this decline
duplicate.
flexible stick.
he is dialing numbers on the telephone
of what sort?
I don't like the way she sewed this shirt
the hunter caught the animal in a trap
his eyes held fast when he once again came away from that girl
I am not related to him.
I am not related to him.
lottery
the animal has been caught in the trap
Perhaps s/he may intend to show the beneficial results that will be available for people if they live in Ujamaa Villages.
Vehicle owners shouldn't increase fares whenever they want.
water for washing.
A bad coconut destroys the good one.
geogr.  north (south) pole.
geogr.  north (south) pole.
geogr.  north (south) pole.
tip of a pencil.
the countries of Africa
papyrus grass.
kid.
he came all the way inside
he thinks within his innermost heart
the answer is that which was said by Nyerere when we entered in multiparty democracy (Kijijini Leo Hii News, 19 July, 2006)
make boastful statements.
make bragging statements.
They saw the <b>airplane</b> that was flying.
the <b>birds</b> were flying from their nests
A good (bad) omen.
A good (bad) sign.
The east-coast fever has appeared in these districts.
He first locked the door and then he went his way.
He first locked the door and then he went his way.
in this very way
Yes, I speak a little Swahili.
The child, who does not like fruits, did not eat the <b>banana</b>.
break up a marriage.
wed
"fight with the fists, box".
she takes a bucket and hurries to the tap
a full pail of water
sleep did not allow her to feel anything, even in dreams
sister
victim of smallpox
Our world had great good fortune.
"articulate clearly, don't talk through the nose".
"speak clearly, don't talk through the nose".
talk clearly, don't talk through your nose
"in the place of, on behalf of, in the name of".
"in the place of, on behalf of, in the name of ".
"in the place of, on behalf of, in the name of".
"in the place of, on behalf of, in the name of".
"in the place of, on behalf of, in the name of ".
Nearly 300 families prosper from the mangrove trade.
Many more benefit from the trade in these trees.
duplicate.
He has not gone to class <b>because</b> he fell sick.
say it again loudly!
He is asking the unobtainable of me.
criticism and self-criticism
among the words I said so that things would occur
black tea (without milk)
the ship flies the flag of Liberia
beat a rug.
beat a rug.
tissue paper
tortoise-shell
maintain discipline
red (black) pigment/dye.
superficially
superficially
red (black) pigment/dye.
second floor
a calf
ox
bull
bullock
ox
second floor
breathe out
inside right (football).
strip off the grains of an ear of maize.
strip off the grains of an ear of maize.
strip off the grains of an ear of maize.
strip off the grains of an ear of maize.
strip off the grains of an ear of maize.
strip off the grains of an ear of maize.
strip off the grains of an ear of maize.
strip off the grains of an ear of maize.
strip off the grains of an ear of maize.
strip off the grains of an ear of maize.
strip off the grains of an ear of maize.
strip off the grains of an ear of maize.
(s)he blamed him/her
Juma did his work carelessly because he was tired
If the children <b>make noise</b>, their mother will order them to stop.
I can't hear you - you have to <b>yell</b>.
the roaring of a lion.
the rumbling of thunder
the fisher bought the entire bunch of bananas
the fisher bought the entire bunch of bananas
tie me one string of fish
she moved away two paces and turned her back on him
redeem a pledge
redeem a pledge
redeem a pledge
redeem a pledge
They <b>vote</b>d for Benjamin Mkapa in the last election.
practice usury.
to plane.
load a rifle.
to tin-plate.
his/her hair is now a single hair that is not natural
... and they ground their teeth with fury [Acts 7:54]
conduct marriage
conduct a wedding
the car was ignited
time and again, she encouraged the mother
box
tell fortunes.
line of mountains
row of mountains
series of mountains
ball competition
the competitions themselves are not yet
ball contest
ball contest
lined paper
the rain beats
main street
Use any means to get him out of jail
What kind of method are you using?
shortcut.
crossroads
"roundabout way, detour".
Main street.
railway track
fig.  a deep voice.
the sole of my foot is becoming thick and sturdy
this matter has annoyed us
I have no objection
check for rescuing (from difficulties) tourists
the moon shone on them and the stars beamed on them
this side
the Somali have many camels
today, our country, America, is supplying the Russians with wheat
Given his(her) rank, he was unable to recognize the habits that had become prevalant
(musical) scale
(musical) scale
(musical) scale
He was biten by a scorpion one day
cuttlefish ink
satisfy desire
satisfy desire
dig up a root.
raise sail
when they finished removing the doors and widows of that house
pull out the tooth
pull out the tooth
remove the tooth
Long waiting hurts the stomach;
I am waiting for a taxi.
Ninangoja teksi.
S(h)e even strained the foot and broke one tooth
How many of your teeth have been uprooted
a dancer will not become crippled for dancing calls for grace (proverb)
two can eat an ox [proverb]
bull
bull
I stay with him (her) here in the world, hand in hand
hit with the fist
he who punches a wall only hurts his own hand (proverb)
beddings
put on clothes
put on clothes
knit cloth
put on clothes
beddings
when the lion roars, who can play about
the roaring of a lion.
the rumbling of thunder
wild pig
wild pig
wild pig
with authority
under compulsion
earnestly
energetically
by force
passionately
strongly
vehemently
electric energy
put under custody
electric power
vehemently
electric energy
electric energy
atomic energy
creative force
five articles of Muslim faith
Her name is Ellen.
to have the intention to pray
maintain discipline
solemnize a marriage
perform the wedding ceremony
solemnize a marriage
perform the wedding ceremony
forgive me father, I will not repeat it again, I have surrendered
a lot of decorations on the wall and others hanging from the roof
what is this?;
What are you doing here?
Unafanya nini hapa?
There was famine in this country.
I am hungry
There was food shortage in this country.
His/her plot to benefit from the award alone
main route
Use any means to get him out of jail
What kind of method are you using?
shortcut.
crossroads
"roundabout way, detour".
Main street.
Use all ways to get him out of jail.
Holy Spirit resembling the dove
the lost dream
A hard variety of peanut (Madagascar/Bambara peanut).
A hard variety of peanut (Madagascar/Bambara peanut).
four people.
(s)he has sharpened the knife, ready to eat flesh, lean meat
whetstone.
to make a coconut nice
to cause Fadhili Magoma to sleep soundly
After crying, (s)he whispered and said
(s)he rejoiced on receiving the note in his/her hands
24 hours' notice.
beeswax.
what else brought him there except bad luck?
they got tired of Mr.  Maksudi's mischievous
"even if they had intended to reform him, haste would have been beneficial".
old droppings do not stink (proverb)
what is causing that bad smell?
Just a moment.
When we were inside the cafe I said: "<b>Buy</b> tea with milk for me!"
bright/cheerful/friendly face.
"emit light, shine".
bright/cheerful/friendly face.
He was so sick he almost died.
He was so sick he nearly died.
Only half the people came.
half an hour.
partly
a small piece.
He was so sick he almost died.
He was so sick he nearly died.
(s)he will be relieved to meet him/her face to face
water livestock.
defecate
rain
urinate.
the house became congested with people
pork
beef.
wild pig
"a good, respectful and untalkative girl".
be very quiet, children!
He goes barefooted and the hut is falling into bits.
the government has forcefull taken the few monies that they had
"This cloth is hopeless, it does nto fit".
This person is irresponsible.
This dress is so old that I cannot wear it any more.
big ape.
A person can loathe him/her because of everything that pertains to him/her
Subira lifted up the eyes
Rehema rose from the chair to go and calm him/her
grass roof
a woman goes silently with care
creep up on a person.
creep up on a person
stalk an animal.
(s)he went away very quietly
The government gives the impression that agricultural development is increasing; yet people are still suffering from hunger.
The conversation shrivels suddenly
(s)he left from inside that car and stealed upto to his/her home.
technical expedient.
Afro-Asian Solidarity Movement.
Rosa was a good girl, humble and quiet
When it is <b>raining</b>, I always stay at home.
They were visiting the <b>open treeless region</b> last year with the aim of seeing gazelles.
you must restrain yourselve somewhat.
We shall refuse him/her food
You must repress yourself
If it is food you shall withhold from me
As (s)he soothed his/her heart and persuaded him/her
a straight line.
there is a tree that until today has been used to hang people
the neck should be cut and twisted before the bird has lost its spirit
there is a tree that until today has been used to hang people
Increment of the welfare of those with a lucky star.
It was his/her time to suckle
"By herself, she was able to clean and suckle the child".
So that father does not come and see your titty
S(he) scolds him/her as if s(he) will make him/her mad
a straight line.
"If you answer our questions, all your matters shall become straight".
Diana's hand is being redressed in th dark
a straight line.
(s)he says as (s)he stretches the hand
Tegemea was redressed untill she became a composed woman
You should all come.  All of you should come.
You cannot see that those are feathers
honey
go back
go backwards.
(things which occurred in ) the past.
rear door
the door of the big house led to a veranda
how is everyone at home?; we arrived at home and we fell deeply asleep
to go to defecate or to urinate
electric bulbs are sorrounded by cobwebs
synthetic fibres.
synthetic threads.
"When Maksuudi saw these changes, he was mortified".
"Horror gripped everyone, leading to the shrinking of the mortified ones".
good news
she was unable to board any bus at all because the fare was too high
He has married off his daughter to an old man.
Permit me to marry your daughter.
They intend to marry in the future
It is not possible to bathe in this sea.
It is not possible to wash in this sea
(ki-Asumini) swarm in waste water.
After washing her daughter
A child washes and is bathed
bake bread
roast meat.
He rescued me from a crocodile (lit.: from the danger of a crocodile).
underpants saved him/her
Zakaria picked it at once.
Woe is me!
Mary got married to Joseph
Regina has never been happy since she got married.
They <b>asked for</b> tea, but they got coffee.
The girl who has no money must be a beggar.
be struck by lightning
be struck by lightning
That old and feeble man wailed
I believe you will be amazed.
How do you feel?  How are you?
I feel hungry
hear a noise.
"as I see it, in my opinion".
feel joy (sorrow)
I think you will be amazed.
feel thirsty, be thirsty
be quiet.
be quiet.
abolish the burial ceremony.
These ones take away sleep
conclude the burial ceremony.
put an end to the burial ceremony.
release from obligations.
terminate the burial ceremony.
Once (s)he leaves for the workplace
I will <b>depart</b> right now because I don't like this party.
lit.: depart from the world.
The bus will <b>leave</b> the city at 9:30.
(S)he laughed heartily and was freed from wavering
elimination of doubts.
Never set foot in my house
Others sympathized with him/her
They looked like angels in their white sheets
(S)he is holding his/her clothes so that the tummy is not visible.
the body is private, it is not good for a person to show his/her colleague
(s)he prepared the milk as (s)he was shown.
Yohana and Mwai were speaking together
(s)he went back to the man to increase his thanks
I was looking for a helper from rearing, not one to add on to it
This organization is spread over the entire country.
This organization is spread over the entire country.
It is only that one day that I lied to you.
give a good turn to a conversation.
give a good turn to a conversation.
give a good turn to a conversation.
give a good turn to a conversation.
give a good turn to a conversation.
give a good turn to a conversation.
give a good turn to a conversation.
(s)he could not understand why people like this were given the party to lead it.
His/her ways began to be forward driven
(s)he was suddenly led inside
lit.: he has tasted money.
I warn you, Nunga, remember my words
military review.
You must show me that letter
(s)he was shown a place and (s)he stayed/lived (there)
"Without any warning, (s)he fell/dropped it".
Give me the stolen ones
a Russian submarine, which was trapped under water for three days with fears that it would run out of air, has been rescued
"one who takes orders at the table, waiter".
second floor
a four-story house.
It is not washable.
I don't even want to have things washed
He warmed himself at the fire
I dream of you every day during the night
warm oneself at the fire.
all the people
anyone
whatever.
the whole country.
One man who wore a white overall
there are both bad and good in the world.
there are both wicked and good in the world.
do one's work aimlessly
do one's work carelessly
do one's work haphazardly
(s)he laughs aimlessly with anybody
Permit me to marry your daughter.
He has married off his daughter to an old man.
one bad fish spoils the whole string (proverb)
the fruits have rotted
at the scene of the crime.
place of safety and knowledge
give the hand (to express congratulations/condolence); lending a helping hand.
play out a game.
(s)he picks leaves from the roof of the chimney
the horse is pawing.
scale fish.
win a game of cards
blow a horn
blow a trumpet.
two bananas that have grown together.
That laughter is symmetrical with rain/(fisherman?)
These children are twins.
fasten a knife-blade in the handle.
"s/he inserted the note(s) into Shangwe's hand." (also = 'slip into'?)
fasten a knife-blade in the handle.
fasten a knife-blade in the handle.
disease of the lungs.
He is possessed by a spirit.
slashing knife.
lopping knife.
prunning knife.
resting-place.
resting-place.
sound/blow an automobile horn.
he smeared that dirty water on his beard
whitewash.
red (black) pigment/dye.
red (black) pigment/dye.
they have painted it red
our countries are adjacent
carry a child
(s)he held that gown on the knee
her child
his/her country
a pack of cigarettes.
a package of cigarettes.
a packet of cigarettes.
exporter
a pack of cigarettes.
a package of cigarettes.
a packet of cigarettes.
have a car loaded
bathroom
washing-place.
a pack of cigarettes.
a package of cigarettes.
a packet of cigarettes.
one packet of cigarettes
the young woman is serving food at the table
the young men have unloaded the baggage
sleeping-place
eating-place.
bathroom
washing-place.
fail to get enough sleep
fail to get enough sleep
"in that very place, in the same place".
in that place.
smoke mounted on him/her and (s)he started coughing.
to assist his/her mother to cut, slash, collect or pile or harvest.
highland.
a beautiful woman is the adornment of the house (proverb)
cotton cloth
the items of decoration fell
what I want now is a person of your status to adorn my house
her room is well furnished
prepare a corpse for burial
Ali and Juma are contesting for the Mombase seat
The teams of this town will come together tomorrow
(s)he cannot distinguish between a person crying for a dead body and one carrying for life
it was night before it became dawn
The edge of the table
the end of the table.
the margin of the table.
the girl's lined fingers are turning over the pages of that newspaper
together with...
water pump.
the open sea
when it is three o'clock.
many tourists attempt to climb Kilimanjaro
get into a car
mount a horse
how he grabbed that slingshot and his eye closed
Maksudi felt cut to the quick
coast and interior.
coast and interior.
for this she avoided them for many days
In this section of the country there are no coconuts
they climbed to the peak of the mountain
building a "block of desire" on Miraji's chest
hoist the sail
he is infuriated (he has lost his temper)
work the entire day without a rest.
work the entire day without a rest.
There were mango trees which were planted in profusion
The farmer has been cutting the grass with a <b>machete</b>
(s)he swept, arranged items and prepared the bedroom of the visitor
seat guests at a feast.
conclude a friendship (which implies a relation of kinship)
form a friendship (which implies a relation of kinship)
lease a house
line up the soldiers
The child cried a lot while I was preparing and clothing him/her
organize guests at a feast.
set up camp.
Others made friendship with him/her
A good street with low houses arranged in rows.
alternation (rotation) of crops
He has a protruding tooth.
But (s)he found it necessary to break up with them on realizing that their ways were headed for transgressions.
lift up the kanzu
tuck in the kanzu
turn up the pants (turn up the trouser legs)
"When (s)he saw Mansuri, (s)he stood at the door and and wore pajamas".
broaden one's mind
"open up the legs, take long steps".
"spread apart the legs, take long steps".
the death of grasshoppers is joy for crows (proverb)
Iron bar
the shark is the famous one in the sea but there are many others (proverb)
it is porous [water passes through]
that of the wood cutter will be like what a pawpaw is to the spoon
Rehema got hold of the new Kanzu and was anxious to put it on.
A blind man feels his way.
His/her hand has started to grope about the table
she kept on caressing herself with her hands
spirillum tick fever.
Idi made his heart tremble with fear
(s)he removed his/her belt from the waist
(s)he winnowed his/her belt from the waist
lacerate with claws/talons
scratch with claws/talons
in that very place
at that very moment
at that very time
heartbeat
heartbeat
tear with claws/talons
rip with claws/talons.
the horse is pawing.
His/her claws could scratch them
scale fish.
fail to get enough sleep
fail to get enough sleep
(s)he climbed onto the bed of Samadari
Padre Johnson was the only padre in that Parish
(s)he kicked, and got scratched
It was Auni's duty to speak
It was necessary that (s)he go
iron (clothes)
Don't enter here without a pass.
Don't enter here without a passport.
without doubt.
Don't enter here without a pass.
Don't enter here without a passport.
Don't enter here without a pass.
Don't enter here without a passport.
operate on (someone).
cut open a tree.
a major road that pushes its way through a town of big houses
split a tree.
tear open a letter
By then Mama Ndomba was about to burst
The mouth gushed out saliva you would think a pipe has split open
His/her clothes used to get torn around the stomach
"Once a lady was married to him, she was forced to be to him just like other women".
He was able to do work.
become strong.
attain strength.
find a reason.
They believed they could not be gotten by what was getting their counterparts in other villages.
He succeeded in hearing.
suffer an illness.
get a cold.
Follow the commands of God and you will achieve your aims.
"They harmonized and she did not mind being called a "woman"".
conclude a contract.
arrange a settlement.
commercial treaty.
come to an understanding
They wanted clothes and especially military attire.
be seized by an illness
Iron bar
"the house is finished, but the roof has not yet been constructed".
long curtains of heavy flowered cloth
eyes have no screens (they see all that is within view) (proverb)
"limp, be lame".
sound/blow an automobile horn.
I alone.
alone
they alone
my bones ache.
drill holes.
my bones hurt.
produce fire by twiring one stick in a hole in another.
produce fire by twirling one stick in a hole in another.
drill holes.
I alone.
alone
they alone
The polisi inspected his house.
the polisi investigated his house.
my bones ache.
drill holes.
my bones hurt.
produce fire by twiring one stick in a hole in another.
produce fire by twirling one stick in a hole in another.
drill holes.
(s)he is searching diligently in his/her wardrobe.
His friends said "<b>Send</b> us an email when you arrive in England!"
transmit a telegraph.
pry into secrets.
pull down coconuts.
right angle.
the four corners of the room (house)
strike with the horns.
rocking chair
rocking chair
rocking chair.
rock a child to sleep
rocking chair
The edge of the table
the end of the table.
the margin of the table.
(s)he did not like being looked at for a long time.;
I like coffee very much.
Napenda kahawa sana.
for your sake
The journey made them love one another.
I don't know why you like (those hair)
They did not have the reputation I preferred my wife to have.
(s)he turned and run towards the mirror and was pleased.
This woman is liked in the whole neighborhood.
excuses
to fill a gap that is there
he has a desire for bananas
he is greedy for bananas.
make one's way into the forest.
The child made his/her way to the door
penetrate the forest.
make one's way through the forest.
enter under the hole
The cat made its way untill it caught the rat
(s)he was with them and you penetrated his mind
Where there is will, there is a way
That route is penetratable
The driver bribed the police
He forced the key into the lock and opened it.
(s)he has a desire to study
the love for a mother
"swing cloths, fan".
"swing cloths, fan".
"swing cloths, fan".
Cool the food before eating
As (s)he caused laughter and blew sweet words
(s)he leaves that place shaking
pulverized grains of rice
(s)he was put in the basket and winnowed up and down
(s)he was put into the basket and winnowed up and down
a good spirit
Bahati left quickly, an indication that he was possessed by the spirit
evil spirit
evil spirit
the hereafter
the other world
the present world
the present world
(s)he was put in a basket and winnowed up and down
he has no money.
bend the leg
roll up a garment
tuck up a garment.
pierce the ears
they are now like ring and finger (i.e., close friends)
the forehead has wrinkled
gasoline oil.
petrol oil
My wife was not full-grown for life
It is difficult to develop him/her fully so that (s)he can grow in line with custom
how will he do it?
where are you going?
which chair
the tourist photographed many large animals
the father hit the child
strike with a fist
wash clothes.
wash clothes.
tell fortunes.
The party had appealed for war against superstition
The party had appealed for war against superstition
I am sure you know what you are fighting for
(s)he feared being beaten
He surpasses me in mathematics but I beat him in geography.
He does better than me in mathmatics but I beat him in geography.
he beats me in mathematics but I beat him in geography.
second
second
second
The eyes popped out of his head a full fathom
I have weighed his words and found that they are untrue.
I have weighed his/her words and found that they are untrue
When Maksudi examined the stomach of that woman, he knew
weigh potatoes.
Aziza and I achieved nothing for criticizing each other
They have said that the geometer is outside the village
They have told me to demolish and vacate to a new site they will measure for me
He pronounced the syllable of those words slowly, bending his mouth with pride
curved line
twist a thread
and what could that salary have helped him with when those with bigger salaries are sleeping hungry
bend of a river
we will see each other in the course of the next year
the times of the day
He held the lower border of the kanzu he wore
head over heels.
change the direction of a ship
turn the page of a book
Tamima was bent downwards
things improved and perhaps exceeded
fall down head over heels.
"If tomorrow I have a stroke, then that is it".
So as to block the aim of Idi's plans
check someone's plans.
counteract someone's plans.
fasten the door
frustrate someone's plans.
lock the door
obstruct a road.
oppose someone's plans.
thwart someone's plans.
"We want to make peace, but there are many difficulties".
"We want to make peace, but there are many disturbances".
"We want to make peace, but there are many impediments".
"We want to make peace, but there are many interruptions".
I saw there were obstacles besetting me
Give me three pieces of flowers.
Perhaps once it knows how to speak, it will call you mother
And sometimes (s)he woke up in the morning to collect mangoes
fuel barrel.
fuel tank
water-container.
If you tell him/her you want bon-bon, (s)he says yes
If you tell him/her you want candy, (s)he says yes
If you tell him/her you want sugar-drop, (s)he says yes
(s)he bought them a bag of chewing-gum, bread and chocolate
Those animations of the European night
This book is better than that one.
This book goes beyond that one.
This book excels that one.
go past a town
by now two years had passed
This book surpasses that one.
chaos of vehicles and the bustling of people
His/her lover will call on him/her for them to go and have fun
the wind howled slowly through the window
the idea of working did not cross through his/her mind.
that is the question that passed through everybody
he passed his fingers over his eyes to wipe away the tears that had filled them
The will of good fortune had been released to conduct the devotions of Idi
The will of good fortune had been released to guide the devotions of Idi
The will of good fortune had been released to pass the devotions of Idi
The sentence (s)he passed on Yohana was cruel.
adopt a resolution.
Mrs Tamima and her family turned the houses upside-down
A listener who does not miss a useful word
The will of good fortune had been released to lead the devotions of Idi.
to plow
He calmed on looking at his wife
He calmed on looking at his wife
He has recovered from the illness.
he has gotten well.
she rummages through the purse
her big dirt is removed by red powder
damage the eyes.
destroy the eyes.
ruin the eyes.
walk in a crooked way.
limp
squinting.
squinting.
squinting.
slashing knife.
lopping knife.
prunning knife.
accept a letter.
acknowledge statements.
admit statements.
agree to the statements.
approve statements.
consent to statements.
obtain a letter.
receive a letter.
"I was looking for someone to relieve me from the nursing/caring, not to add to it".
They have given us a good reception.
They have given us a good reception.
slashing knife.
lopping knife.
prunning knife.
speak carefully.
speak cautiously.
The old people descended the stairs <b>slowly</b>.
speak carefully.
speak cautiously.
they said it is not wise for some of the people to use grain to make alcoholic beverages during a time in which the nation is affected by a great scarcity of food
The leader suffered from malaria, but he got better.
If she takes the medicine, she will <b>recover</b>.
Tuza had already healed his/her hand
legs that go wayward crush what and what.
pound clay.
ram clay.
He was run over by an automobile.
tamp clay.
full breasts made her congratulate herself
we have been given congratulations and awards for cooperation and our contribution to various activities of society and the nation
this man sleeps like a parrot fish
Rehema got an opportunity to rescue herself.
Jesus with his power was able to heal the blind
Rehema got an opportunity to rescue herself
"make a slip of the tongue, say the wrong thing".
"make a slip of the tongue, say the wrong thing".
the desire to always want something will be risky to you
since he is gone we feel abandoned
the arm is crippled
an impotent man
the arm is paralyzed
knock mangoes off a tree
He bought areca nut
Grandmother chewed betel nut with tobacco
(s)he visits anywhere
(s)he distorted his/her hand
strain the leg
twist the shade
(s)he is a crooked person
The thief snatched her purse.
The husband takes her salary by force
They live in the wilderness
The grass has rotted after the rains in the steppe
wilderness of animals
They have stopped iddle chattering
They were chitchatting
The children had a light conversation
They have stopped iddle talk
The had idle talk
The children played in watery mud
The stew was watery
The builder fell off the roof of the house.
The builder fell off the roof of the house.
The house slide after a heavy downpour
Ali slipped under the bridge
As (s)he saw his/her life collapse
(s)he climbed that cliff by foot
a landslide
an avalanche
cloudburst.
waterfall
The water stayed in the gully
The rain caused a ravine
The rain caused a steep slope at the corner of the mountain
The ice brought the roof of the house down
The children thew a kite into the air.
The paid the marriage settlement for his betrothed
money for wedding preparations.
send a proposal for marriage (from the parents of a man to the parents of a girl.)
The wedding preparations were finalized
The marriage celebrations began yesterday
money for wedding preparations.
Ali got engaged yesterday
money for wedding preparations.
money for wedding preparations.
money for wedding preparations.
We supported him/her during the time of troubles
Give him/her his/her allowance
(s)he was paid per diem after working
John was given the daily rations of maize meal after the work
He bought the means of subsistence for a week
The yearly harvests have been used as the subsistence allowance
The driver was paid the mileage allowance after the journey
all the workers were paid entertainment allowance
The vice president is paid acting allowance
send a proposal for marriage (from the parents of a man to the parents of a girl.)
The wedding preparations were finalized
post office stamp
juma sent me an e-mail from germany
The girl was courted by her lover
distort words
pervert words.
twist/twine thread.
You can stay anywhere
at that time his happiness was lost
to get lost is to learn the way (proverb)
her cat perished
(s)he used money extravagantly
stop your wastefulness
he has lost his money
the joints are loose and are losing strength
they misused their father's money
he threw away money
(s)he distorted.
It is not usual for him/her to spoil the views of the father
(s)he bent the hand of the child
Ali is walking in a crooked way because of his bad leg
A ruined town
(s)he is a stubborn child
His/her limb is crooked
(s)he is a victor if (s)he was stubborn
His/her finger was twisted
The visitor distorted our views
Stop your stubbornness
an obstinate person
Give me a pound of gold
bubble
effervesce
"On arriving at home, (s)he finds that (s)he still has foams of soap in the ear".
Children played with lather as they washed
wash the scum sticking on the limbs
All the people consoled Ali and his sorrows.
The mother cooled off the child's milk
The medic cured the patient
Heal the wound
As (s)he comforted and flattered him/her
Be quiet
It is okay if you get illegal traffic to sell shoes from the port
blood oozed from his/her nose and mouth
wash clothes.
pound clothes.
scrape off the bark of a tree.
The boxing champions fought each other well
Two cats had sexual intercourse the whole night
peel of mango.
separate maize grains from the chaff
Before eating, (s)he skinned the mango
strip off the grains of an ear of maize.
peel off the mango.
peel off the skin
The child scratched its mother on noticing that it was not going to be given milk
The farmers separated the maize grains from the chaff after drying them in the sun
skin off
strip off the grains of an ear of maize.
shake down fruits.
strip off the grains (from an ear of maize)
The water was in abundance at the ocean
The water was in abundance at the ocean
During the wedding, the house had plenty of people
During the wedding, the house had plenty of people
The mother bought a full bundle of bananas
The visitors congratulated the husband after the wedding
hand out presents to the children
The children harvested fruits by shaking off the tree
(s)he rewarded him/her with a present
Grandmother shook off her clothes
shake down fruits.
strip off the grains (from an ear of maize)
rice cooked in such a way that the grains are separate
Lulu was playing with pieces of bread that had fallen off the table
they remained to be harvested by the sunbird
Because the fire failed to light, he fanned it
Idi told him/her in a gentle and appropriate voice
inflate a ball
The heart-beat went first on hearing that his/her mother had died
the pulse of the watch
the leg throb with pain
(s)he bought a bundle of food
a heap of clothes
a lump of plowed earth
a package of goods
Usually, (s)he smoke a packet of cigarettes every day
The old man was absentminded after sleeping
do one's work carelessly.
do one's work lazily.
(s)he was negligent until (s)he fell of the tree
After work, they relaxed by taking beer
(s)he was speechless to see that the child was speaking well
do one's work thoughtlessly.
stop being dull-witted
stop your foolishness
(s)he was perceived as an ignorant person due to his/her stupidity
(s)he spoke like a stupid person
astound the mind
(s)he decived him/her fraudulently
The mother deluded the child so that it could not sleep early
(s)he embarrassed him/her after everybody else had praised him/her
John made a fool of Ali after deceiving him
take the mind off
the girl made everybody speechless on giving her speech
Grandfather suffered from a disease of the scrotum
big testicle
the old man has a disease of the scrotum
big testcile
asthma is a disease of hold up in air pressure
(s)he caught asthma until (s)he could not breath
Now I can catch a breath/take a rest.
Now I can catch a breath/take a rest.
The old man breathed after a long time
We now need to cause grandfather to breathe
work the entire day without a break.
breathe out
Breathe when you are running
(s)he ran with heavy respiration
work the entire day without a rest.
work the entire day without a break.
breathe out
(s)he made the last breath before gasping for the spirit
work the entire day without a rest.
With ferocity and excitement taking pressure on him
rest after work
(s)he retired from work after fifty years
The children played at the place for recreation
During the time for recreation, the students travelled
The resort at the Island was nice
We waited for the bus at the resting place
During the time for relaxation, I will visit the parents
Rest break (from work)
school vacation
calm these chidren
It is not usual for him to give peace to his/her workers
All the workers were allowed some time to rest from his/her work
Soothe this child from crying
scrape off the bark of a tree.
strip the bark off a tree.
pack ass
two or three times an African passed, I don't know which tribe, wearing nothing apart from a zebra skin
"we waited for him, and he soon came".
"We waited for him, and in a little while he came".
The lion smelt the antelope directly
the heat of the sun is decreasing (toward sunset).
the heat of the sun is diminishing (toward sunset).
exorcise a spirit.
"fan the arms, give a signal".
"swing the arms, give a signal".
"wave the arms, give a signal".
What did (s)he diminish
"fan the arms, give a signal".
"fan the arms, give a signal".
"swing the arms, give a signal".
"swing the arms, give a signal".
"swing the arms, give a signal".
"fan the arms, give a signal".
"fan the arms, give a signal".
"It is not the right amount of money (i.e., is too little)".
a shorter month (of 29 days).
Nowadays there is a wane of food because of the drought
Health deficiency
(s)he diminshed the brain because of smoking opium
his/her weight has grown less
(s)he ran short of money during the journey
Nowadays (s)he has decreased the body
Also, (s)he is lessening eating a lot
The tailor has lowered the price for tailoring
Reduce speaking correctly
make the food less
diminish the stomach
The teacher shortened the joke with laughter
The cloth is a bit long, it need to be reduced
The merchant cheated on the price of fish
The tourist conned his/her colleagues
he deceived me by a whole pound.
have the avidity to do something.
(s)he was eager to see the mother
greediness to eat
I did not take him/her with haste
be in a hurry to do something.
have a zeal for something.
I did not want to be eager since he would have found me out.
I did not want to be in a hurry to do (something) since he would have found me out
wash clothes.
(s)he knocked down fruits (from a tree)
pound clothes.
The mother removed the shell from the beans before cooking them
strip off maize grains
The children fought each other with a whip
the lovers had sexual intercourse for one hour
talk (listen) heedlessly/inattentively.
talk (listen) heedlessly/inattentively.
talk (listen) heedlessly/inattentively.
(s)he felt contemptuous of her(him)self on realizing that (s)he had erred.
talk (listen) heedlessly/inattentively.
(s)he listened inattentively, when (s)he was told of his/her mistakes
(s)he distracted the work rythm
Because of wanting to divert that side
The driver drove the car carelessly
contemptuously
frivolously
act ngeligently
superficially
wash clothes.
pound clothes.
The rain has abated.
The rain has gradually ceased.
The rain has let up.
beat a rug.
beat a rug.
(s)he disregarded the conversation
do one's work in a foolish way.
"Usually, (s)he does his/her work in a foolish way if (s)he is tired".
(s)he waited for Idi to say a word but he ignored him/her
do one's work in a silly way.
do one's work in a foolish way.
talk nonsense
do one's work in a silly way.
speak in a silly way
Your silly behavior emanated from your disrespect for the people.
low tide.
the water dried up in the morning
grind rice in a mortar.
pound rice in a mortar.
a clever thief and a still more clever one met each other.
coast and interior.
coast and interior.
the coat/suit is too big for him.
the coat/suit is too big for him.
the coat/suit is too big for him.
His/her throat dried because of his/her speaking a lot
He found himself in solitude after his wife died.
Mashua run aground in town
The traveller was stranded at the port
the apparatus was run aground
she dragged herself into the kitchen and threw herself on top of the coconut grater
The well dried up of water
(s)he became hoarse because of singing
it cruised into the stones searching for cuttle-fish
Shamelessnes throbs his/her mouth
fresh tomatoes
modern studies
new clothes
up-to-date work
a clever thief and a still more clever one met each other.
a clever thief and a still more clever one met each other.
The Lord is the Creator of all living things in the world
the bed that was in confusion
the bed that was in disorder
stop the commotion!
he is a confused person
she is making noise
the punishment for his/her mistakes will be paid for by God
Tamima was forever contented with inheriting her husband
this arrangement does not meet with my approval.
he has been disowned by his father (does not have his father's blessing)
because of his/her choice, not because of his/her contentment
the Japanese Government has once again pleaded fogiveness for atrocities committed by its Asian army during the war of 1930 to 1940
pardon me!
this arrangement does not meet my satisfaction.
be struck by lightning
the short one was hit by trembling thunder
the short one was hiby trembling thunderclap
be struck by lightning
be struck by lightning
be struck by lightning
children enjoy playing with their friends
The team from K.  played very unfairly.
The team from K.  played very unfairly.
be in comfort.
find contentment
find enjoyment.
find entertainment
Regina has had no peace since she got married
pay off a loan
redeem a pledge
redeem a pledge
cheap goods.
an easy language (=one easy to learn)
easy work.
(s)he had no strategy nor idea of how to save her(him)self
in the opinion of ....
"Don't send him to the assembly, for he has no standpoint (of his own)".
inside right (football).
"to hope, have hopes".
Until (s)he will be given a taste of honey
tell fortunes.
Those who were cheerful did not have the intention of inciting enemity
to plane.
red color
she applies cosmetics on the cheek and mouth
red (black) pigment/dye.
As Maksuudi flogged him/her with a strap
"fig.  abuse each other, speak ill of each other".
This cloth will not rip.
This cloth will not rip.
This cloth will not rip.
Those who are laughing are splitting each other with laughter even more
sprinkle with water.
The drrippings of a drizzle (of rain)
sprinkle with water.
give a formal reception
official uniform
the timetable should be affixed to the notice board and other copies distributed to each attendee
Spanish dollar.
a long time
a tall tree
a deep well
extend a line.
pay off a loan
mortgage a house.
redeem a pledge
redeem a pledge
commission business.
refer to the grammar.
To repeat difficult pharmaceutical words
(s)he had ran away from him/her on two occassions but returned later.
after his return.
during his lifetime, Daudi Kabaka <b>record</B>ed many songs, and they were loved by Kenyanse
railroad line.
railroad line.
railroad line.
railroad
railway
train line
To adorn oneself with cosmetics of the cheek and mouth
(s)he lives with beautiful people
it was exhausted with blinking eyes
adopt a resolution.
Spanish dollar.
Spanish dollar.
practice usury.
His agreement to his boss
Tamima was ever since willing to consent to her husband
forgive him/her for his/her mistakes
forgive him/her for his/her mistakes
(s)he wanted to please him/her but was not able.
I will satisfy your needs
(s)he was not satisfied even with one of those regions
The only man who was able to take on the life of Diana and to satisfy it
The referee pointed out the mistake after the players fought
I don't like his/her aroma
The fragrance of this oil is nice
(s)he has bad odor
But among this age-group, the obligations of the youthful age have not stopped vascillating
put under arrest.
put in prison.
put in remand.
A light cloth with many folds
when Tegemea was married by Kabenga, she put on airs a few days at the beginning
that girl is conceited for she thinks she is very beautiful
The house burst into flames after catching fire
my heart explodes and the legs swing
the father flared up on seeing that his child had been injured
my heart flies into a rage and the legs swing
(s)he has sent a letter
The message from maua has arrived
give me a summary of your discussion
to tin-plate.
the police fired bullets at his body
Her/his face has imbued pain
(s)he deviated from Islam
After his/her father died, (s)he inherited four cows
(s)he succeeded to the throne on his/her father's death
His/her greatgrandfather bequeathed him the throne
Grandfather divided up the property of his dead parents
You don't know whether it passes on the decay of the tooth.
HIV/Aids is a transmitted disease
I also like reading stories of all sorts: from terror to espionage to war and horror, from those of love to devilish ones
"I also like reading stories of all sorts: from those of gangsters to espionage and war and horror, from those of love to devilish ones".
to read terror and espionage novels
where (s)he lives is near the reserve
To secure a job has never been destiny
the child died, it was not his/her fate
I have not put maintenance in the stomach today ( I have not eaten today)
He has had nothing to eat since morning.
three quarters
a quarter past eight
a bale of cotton.
a bundle of cotton.
a packet of goods
a parcel of letters
curdled milk.
curdled milk.
something else that could bewitch any man
she gave out her last breath
he has a good character
greed likes eating a lot
if God takes his life today, he will be satisfied
she has a good personality
the players had the spirit to win
the toothbrush was pressed down the throat
Mrs Tamima was unable to resist, she stood up, and was following from behind slowly by slowly
the Mother of God who gave birth by the power of the Holy Spirit
the mother cooked mashed potatoes
gelatinous (fish food)
I cooked rice and gravy
pad/platform for launching rocket
(s)he wore shoes in the feet that made him/her to be tall
possibly things would have gone well had Stella not blathered
the drunkard spoke without thinking
stop talking nonsense
the children are playing near the balcony
they slept on the veranda
the water dripped constantly and soaked the floor of the house
the parent organizing the group
choir director.
the guide took the tourists around
choir leader
the editor of this dictionary is an airplane pilot
come back from a journey.
the father corrected his child because of a mistake
She has <b>return</b>ed home because her mother feels sick.
the visitors will rejoin here after their journey
the thief has gone back to stealing again
"will you repeat?"  "I will not repeat, my master"
the wife and the husband returned to each other
return the car today
the child returned the money to his/her mother
return the favor, reciprocate
restore confidence
take back the present
he received back his money
his/her child was returned back to him/her
their case has been take up for appeal (legal)
file an appeal (legal)
ask for permission.
ask for permission.
during the vacation, we shall visit Florida
allow him/her to go home
permit him her to stay in the classroom
John was permitted to stay in class
(s)he is in a state of sleep that cannot allow him/her to perceive anything
the teacher allowed the student to stay in the classroom
from afar a child's dream came to him
cross boundary.
shhh, be silent the aeroplane will fly
take off.
Zakaria was playing by jumping up and down
pass beyond the borders/limits
pass over the border/limits
The rice has swelled up.
go beyond bounds.
go beyond bounds.
go beyond bounds.
go beyond bounds.
go beyond bounds.
issue the dismissal
school holiday
driving license
ask for permission.
the cat jumped at the rat
flight of an aeroplane
(s)he was beside him(her)self
the Sultan of Turkey
put under arrest.
put in prison.
put in remand.
like the way (s)he speaks and picks quarrels with his/her colleagues
put under arrest.
put in prison.
put in remand.
the child threw the book over the table
the pilot flew the airplane over the air
the police received a bribe
(s)he bribed the police
to dream strongly in the dampness of love
The soil is fertile.
The soil is moist.
the plants have been invigorated by the rain
The manure has made the field fertile.
if you are a farmer it is essential to know the rules of crop rotation in order to improve the soil, that is crops like beans, peanuts, and bullrush millet are among the crops with a great capability to improve the soil
This person has supplied me with enough food and other things
a medicine for whooping cough.
wall clock
we traveled for three hours
what time is it?
wristwatch
seventh
two weeks
The celebrations of the anniversary of TANU were addressed by the chairman of the workers organization
John caused the house to catch fire
the child caused the house to catch fire.
what caused you to beat him/her
for what reason did you beat him
Kidawa greeted him in the morning
President Clinton received President Yeltsin from Russia
John has seventy years
good morning, mother
That girl is hostile
The teacher will arrive on the 17th
John caused the house to catch fire
The child gave the reason for the house to catch fire
"Every morning, the teacher pays a call to his wife before leaving".
I have met with him face to face
to take one of their female children and to let her free into a foreign land
give me seventy dollars
a Russian submarine, which was trapped under water for three days with fears that it would run out of air, has been rescued
The visitors retired to the reception room
soap bubbles
forebearance brings good tidings
patience is good
to be resigned brings good luck/tiddings
wait for me
the woman gave alms to the poor
The President offers charity to poor people
religious offering was taken to the Mosque
let us go and offer sacrifice at the place where offerings are made to the ancestors
The teacher corrected the student in the classroom
(s)he was ready to believe that that grief was useless
the judge trusted the thief
a dependable worker
the old man (elder) Ali is a trustworthy person
his information is believable
we confirmed that the woman will arrive tommorrow.
the old man Ali was convinced that these children are the ones who stole his money
the preached was believed a lot by the faithfuls
the old man was tired after one wavelength of the journey
her airplane departure is this morning at 8:15
Mansuri returned to his business journeys
I will not speak with him this moment
last time
on this trip we shall visit East Africa
his house was clean
<a href="http://www.npr.org/templates/rundowns/rundown.php?prgId=13" target="_blank">fresh air</a>
speak good/ pure Swahili
clean the cup
she decorated her house in an orderly manner
an unjust person is an impudent person
a lout person
(s)he abuses children
the child abused his/her mother
this is a boor child in front of her parents
an imprudent person
Biti Kocho recitified Maksuudi with impertinence
the boat reached the port
Today we shall travel early
the ship will transport the goods to the port
the mother (woman) will transport the children to their grandparents
a line of people
a row of people
series of trees
pale
palid
lack of blood is anemia
I pounded and sieved them and the rest I ground into coral rags
Maua milled maize at the
pulverize the teeth
women can have lesbian sex with one another
ginger is groundable
the rain facilitated the drought
a tray with a pot of tea and a plate of bread
porcelain plates
the old man had a lapse of memory, he did not take his medicine
forgetting is not remembering
drunkenness caused him to forget to take his medicine
Sahib is a good friend
Sahibu is a good friend
the talk of the old man is very genuine
a black mark on the thumb is the sign of a cook
the teacher corrected the work of the students
the old man validated the history of your family
the students made a correction of their mistakes
the revision of this book was done by our teacher
the Pope assisted poor people
I will be able to <b>help</b> you when you are carrying many things.
the farmers assisted each other in their farm work
the villagers helped one another with the government to curb crime
the student was aided to pay school fees
the patient was assisted to walk
father asked mother a question
the thief was examined by the police
all the workers who were called to be asked by mrs.  Tamima looked at each other
put a mark
put a sign
put a signature
The driver did not give a turn signal
the size of his/her shoes is size eight
the cat caught the rat
we have searched for him/her in every corner
to sing and to have songs sang for, to play the children's game
the floor of the house broke after an earth tremor
a clay/stone roofed building
the fish trap caught it at the throat
the fish trap stuck it at the throat
In the wedding parade, Hamisi beat the drum well
the car moved slowly in the mud
hunger is pressing
hunger is squeezing
hunger is tight
Lord's prayer
mother made salad for lunch
it is not good to express surprise on somebody
Salala!  dangerous!  Subira crushed the teeth
God forbid!  dangerous!  Subira crushed the teeth
John bought meat to make soup
this neighborhood is secure
favorable outcome
we are now living safely after the thief was arrested
they were listening to him/her as (s)he quivered and prayed for his/her good health
good peace
security of the people
she gave birth safe and sound
after the greetings, the girl asked the teacher about 'that thing'
the convicts were bound with anchorchain
(s)he started praying slowly by slowly
"send him," Tamima prayed for
muslims stay for a corpse in the mosque
there is a big German building that has remained up to now
Juma does not tell lies, he is an honest person
His name is Salim
Ali congratulated his grandfather
Greet the parents
the visitors greeted each other before eating
he wanted Africa to be his second homeland, where he would be safe during his childhood and would grow up to be more and more African
all the travellers arrived safely
Amina made the house safe because of the thieves
she started to make preparations for the time she would hand herself over to that young man
the grandmother was greeted by the woman (mother)
the leader was saluted by the soldier(s)
give up the ghost or spirit (die)
hand over the spirit (die)
We who are about to die salute you.
the priest led the noon prayers
the visitor is the one who alienated us
the betray his manhood
If you mix two kinds of this sand, you will get good sand
if you mix two kinds of this sand, you will get good sand
the visitor is the one who set us at variance
take greetings
take a salute
the President received a welcome from the city police/soldiers
(s)he quickly climbed into the wooden bed
manure is good for farming
manure
excuse me for not seeing you
forgive me for being late
One bad fish infects all the rest (proverb).
stone mason's tools
he has azure eyes
sky blue color
the animals scattered in the park because of fearing the liion
father and brother walked alongside each other
parallell lines
simultaneous lines
the house disintegrated because of being hit by the rains
the padre spread the hands
pastry is made of minced meat, onions and pepper
forgive mistakes
I have looked for it and I did not find it, so I have given up
pardon mistakes
the sobbing of the mother of the deceased that is forgivable
(s)he was pardoned because of his/her old age
clarified butter is forty cents
(s)he cooked pancake-shaped bread with ghee
give me his/her sample to see
I like him/her a great deal
at the most, (s)he arrives home five minutes earlier
I like coffee very much.
artwork
senna is a medicine for stomach upset
the figure of Vasco de Gama
idol worship
image of worship
(s)he looked at the statute of Jesus
the corpse was covered with the burial cloth after it was washed
a dead person is not asked for a shroud (proverb)
sandalwood oil
ballot box
suitcase
(s)he turned to the chest and removed the cloth of Luciana
(s)he received the letters from the post office box
(s)he was amazed on seeing the lion in the forest
(s)he surprised everybody for jumping through the window
(s)he spoke standard Kiswahili
a standard cook
an artful job
a skillful worker
(s)he produced a work of art
the soldiers stood in a single file in front of the President
the soldiers are moving in a column/line
(s)he chose slippers of two shillings
long flowing beard
the exchange rate of the dollar is high in the market
the children went to see the circus and to be happy
sirloin meat
The US and Brazilian teams drew
Sari is a traditional dressing of Indian women
to speak correctly
to write grammatically
to write with style
the mason is mixing concrete for construction
the house was put a mixture of concrete to make it ash-colored
(s)he dresses in fashion
modern dressing
everything is upto date
I want to eat now
nowadays
at present
what are we going to do now?
I am coming right now
John will arrive right now
there is a possibility (s)he will arrive today
during Ramadhani, the Muslims fast
(s)he is fasting
Voice of America
talk in a loud voice
increase the volume of the radio
lower the volume of the radio
all people are equal
these children look alike
it is fair to help him/her
a flat land/country
a level land/country
I don't know whether it is right
straight land/country
do it equally
do it exactly
do it fairly
do it just the same
they were divided the money evenly
(s)he made the work even
it is alright to beat a thief
(s)he works correctly
they divided the money equally
(s)he arbitrated the quarrel fairly
the glass got Matata just ahead
and (s)he arrived at that very moment
and then (s)he arrived
and (s)he arrived at that time
his/her face looked like it had been disfigured in the style of a clound
there are eight planets
the Prophet was let free by his master
she told everything, leaving not a single word unsaid
the children ate the leftovers from dinner
the visitors are in the living room
(s)he enters the sitting room and is confronted by darkness
refusing and wanting at the same time (proverb)
Shame!  (s)he is not ashamed to walk without clothes
lift clothes
turn up clothes
a district that is self-governing
an element of the machine
pay by installment
paragraph of a chapter
part of a machine
a region that is self-governing
a section of the book
a share of my colleague
(s)he studies in a secondary school
hold a weapon
The signal of arrival has not yet been given
Say!  I beat you
I speak a little Swahili.
talk with mother
Well, say something, will you?
as (s)he mumbled words which were incomprehensible
it is not good to cheat
they abused each other after they were caught by police
apart from a shilling, I will not even give you a cent
I will not give you a cent, not to mention a shilling
I will not give you a cent, to say nothing of a shilling
Sidi addressed him/her near the ear by mumbling.
Mary spoke to John
the politics they continued to get from different seminars there in the village
the Senator for the state of Ohio
it was the vehicle of the prisoners which was ringed with barbed wire
it was the vehicle of the prisoners which was ringed with iron wire
they backbite Ali because he was not there
(s)he was found guilty of calumniating the boss
stop insulting
the children spoke ill of their friend
three-side concentric
center of a triangle
today I don't have a cent (i.e.  I don't have money)
we listened to the ancient songs from the zither-like musical instrument
the drunkard staggered
the old man stumbled
I will require a shovel to dig
spade to scoop sand
(s)he slipped and fell
we shall visit Africa during the month of September
religious policy
the foreman showed the workers where to construct
the headman of the workers
the headman of the ship
the headman of the workers
the table is being made by the carpenter
the jioner is fixing the timber
an administration order
interim authority
interim government
the table was made by the carpenter
the joiner is assembling the timber
put cement
put concrete
the mill is crushing the maize
the patient had a protracted illnes at night but now (s)he is okay
(s)he bought a set of household utensils
"during the month of Shaabani (month before Ramadhani), Muslims make preparations for the celebrations of the month of fasting".
many people mistake brass for gold (proverb); the coconut leaves on the roof gleamed like brass threads
the door fastener was made of copper
the fruit tree is like a mango
the fruit tree is the same as a mango
his/her aim was to arrive early
(s)he has no good intention
get a mark
to show his target and count the number of birds (s)he had hit
take an aim of the birds on top of the tree
the police shot and hit his mark
to him/her every word is an exeggeration
to him/her, every word is an excess
the eighth month of the Muslim calendar is a month of preparations for the Muslims
(s)he has a flaggarant appearance
this child looks very much like his/her mother t
it is a good child who looks like his/her mother in almost everything
this child resembles his/her mother a lot
this child is very much similar to his/her mother
for him/her every word is an exaggeration
for him/her every word is an excess
the President was presented with a bouquet of flowers on his arrival at the airport
bunch of flowers
a cluster of flowers
throw a kite into the air
necklace of beads
string of beads
(s)he lost the keyring
to receive his/her first degree
for a warning is not like the Islamic confession of faith, it is not issued twice
(s)he received a degree in economics
(s)he began to recite by heart
(s)he got a meagre salary
he dreamt and spermed in his sleep
religious martyr
parasites were witnesses to the naughtiness of childishness
that plate that they ordered for, has remained and has attested to the rice
compose poetry
a love poem
(s)he recited a poem
his/her poem does not rhyme
(s)he has recited a good poem
(s)he has wild tough eyes like those of the devil.
(s)he had the devil's supernatural powers
(s)he writes names and addresses in his/her dairy
"try it for the second time, try you will succeed" (s)he encouraged him/herself
(s)he has met with concern
(s)he has met with difficulty
they have doubt
they have uncertainty
(s)he has met with uneasiness
be caught up in the grief of crying
be caught up in the misery of crying
Red Sea
I live in the countyside
If you stay at his <b>farm</b> more than one day, you will be expected to grab a hoe.
a cornfield
the soldiers attacked each other in the Gulf war
attack each other
bombard each other
invade each other
the rebels made a great invasion
the first raid did not succeed
the cattle keepers were attacked by thieves
the attacker was cut
the noise of closing the feast of Idi (celebration of the birthday of Prophet Muhammad)
(s)he was amaze to see him/her without clothes
(s)he was dumbfounded to see the father at home
the father was filled with enthusiasm to see that his child had won in the examination
I was shocked to hear that the airplane fell into the sea
the children were surprised to see that the snake had eaten the mouse
the old folks wondered on seeing that they culture is being ruined
they congratulated him/her
they greeted him/her
they received him/her with joy
they welcomed him/her
don't wear those clothes, you might amaze the child
an aunt is the father's sister
n aunt is the sister of the parents
the father of John is like my aunt
the youth applauded their team after it won
the entire town celebrated its team
the girls are cheerring ther male counter parts
Ali congratulated his child for winning an award
"Looooh, viva, viva!"  (s)he demonstrated with enthusiasm
the visitors gave the bride a hearty welcome once she arrived
they greeted him/her
they received him/her with joy
they are shouting with joy for the poll victory
the first congratulations came from the capital city
the victory reception
the rejoicings of the wedding
the victors were received with rejoicings
as (s)he sang, and was being received with triumph and being congratulated by everybody
this wedding has no festivity
they gave him an ovation
they rejoiced in receiving him/her
the girls' association with the soldiers was received with curiosity
this celebration has been more notable than the one of yesterday
It was marvelous to see Ali singing
(s)he was born in an unexpected occurrence
the students stood in a single file as they received the awards
we went to class following in succession
(s)he is combing his/her hair with a wooden comb
a bees ferry
honeycomb
a raft of bees
after working, the elders took alcoholic refreshments
this drink has alcohol
intoxicating beverage is alcoholic
this person likes wine when eating
with the honor of the President
her status does not allow her to live here
long and/or flowing beards
an evil child
ready to undertake any journey either by luck or mischief
(s)he is the one who plunged his/her family into poverty
John provoked his cousin
challenge
defy
legal
constitution of the land
appeal for justice
law and separation (separation of powers?)
to be noble is a big status
our interests are communal
our property is cooperative
our property is in partnership
put shares
be addicted to drunkardness
be associated with a business
combine in business
be devoted to drunkardness
join a business
unite in business
it is necessary that you come
it is an obligation that you come
I will give you one stake
her/his permanent term is to destroy his/her house
we drank soft drinks after eating
(s)he squeezed (milked) the coconut solids to produce oil
put on a blouse
put on a shirt
(s)he waited with a lot of excitement and strong desire
(s)he is eager with them
in his/her enthusiasm to see his/her aims im sports becoming a reality
(s)he is impatient with them
(s)he is longing for them
(s)he has a passion for them
(s)he wanted his/her mother to accept the advice of being taken to the hospital
that affair is not bad
(s)he counselled me well
they talked about your debate
the building design is not bad
we shall have such a discussion afterwards
do you have intentions?
it is your matter whether you will follow them
I did not like their negotiations
I have no opinion
do you have a plan?
do you have a problem?
do you have a project?
ask for a suggestion
what topic for our discussion are you proposing?
voice your stand (on a matter)
ask father for an advice
confer with father first
consult with the woman (mother)
take counsel with the child before travelling
decide yourself whether you will go with us
it's your problem if you encounter a bomb
we negotiated to travel together
I did not like this temptation
my friend lured me to take alcohol
Elizabeth talked the woman into not wearing those shoes
she has big calves
lure the child into sleep
Ali talked his/her friend into buying a car
It is not common for John to be persuaded to take alcohol
the storyteller will not come today
I saw the chief at the Mosque
his brother-in-law is the (elder) brother to his wife
the family of her husband are our relatives by marriage
particles of rice
(s)he hacked firewood using an ax
(s)he was a barbarous person
(s)he was perceived as an uncivilized person
make a derision
She thinks she will sing at the celebration.
we shall meet at the festival
the children returned home after the merriment
merrymaking at the wedding
birthday party
after the wedding and its rejoicings
I have no right to celebrate and be given awards this time.
the parents rejoiced at the wedding of their child
everybody celebrated the festival of the birthday of Prophet Muhammad
rejoice at oneself
make a derision
have fun
crack a joke
make a mockery
legal
laws of the land
appeal for justice
institute legal proceedings
the regulations of this school require that all the children wear black shoes
the beauty of the country
the demon is not visible
childhood has no danger of feminine of masculine, devil or jins
(s)he was seized by the evil spirit
the medicine person liked the supernatural power of the devil
be absorbed in studies
she was appeased by our explanation.
we have been filled with good food.
will you be sated with this food?
I've been satisfied by one soda.
appeasement is the abode of evil.
I was full
the satisfaction of food pleased him/her
when she was born, she was about nine inches
(s)he satisfied all the children with nice food
be in difficulty
be in distress
be in hardship
(s)he has no problem
get into trouble
Shifta are robbers who seize other people's property
observe the law
carry on the conversation
comply with the law
follow the law
grab the hand
grasp air
insist on the price
keep this money
occupy a vacancy in the vehicle
persist on the price
(s)he seized all the items
nowadays (s)he is well mannered
Mother is in charge of the household
the elder brother led in returning home
laughter and jokes have become more intense again
after being defeated, (s)he became more vehement
to take the opportunity to be the first in the competitions
to be placed at the first position in the competitions
follow the path back home
as they followed the road back to town
proceed with your journey
observe the laws of the land
(s)he met him/her seating on the bed and with hope
(s)he was pensive that (s)he went on a journey
the fish cleaved together in the ice
the rice stuck together after being cooked
Shikamuu grandfather--the grandchildren greeted their grandfather
holding each other's hand under the table
"I have said I did note take even a single oath", Nuka held on to that
handles of the cooking pot
Mzee Juma fastened the tree on the sloping side of the native thatched roof
Mzee Juma fastened the tree to the sloping side of the native thatched roof
post of the sloping side of the native thatched roof
(s)he put up a prop to preserve the wall of the house
the support of the house has come out
the thief was seized by the police
Bahati was held by the urge to see Idi
give me three shillings
participate, we work together
Come on now, let's all pull together
His clothes do not fit/become him
rat's hole
the hollow of a plate
gold mine
vertical shaft
hidding trench
we passed under the tunnel
the tree will be planted in this hole
the root of this tree is short
the source of river Nile is lake Victoria
the residue of the mill
bear pain
conquer the enemy
endure pain
(s)he came first in the competition
(s)he was left at home
overcome the enemy
overpower the enemy
He passed his level four exam
(s)he passed all the time crying
(s)he remains at home
my mother's friend spent the day at our place
my mother's friend stayed at home all day long
I realize that to control my wife the way I want will subdue me
Aziz had his own intelligibility that surpassed those who had educated themselves
win a game
clothes were packed together inside the box
to settle a footbll match
to settle a football match
they were disputing
we shall fall out with you every day until you leave this place
as (s)he tried to contain a heavy body which was overwhelming him
Ali and John were competing in wrestling
the children are struggling over who runs fastest
football competition
a ball competition
give an injection
magnetic needle of the phonograph
the fishing race will start in December
give a shot (of injection)
we did not win the last struggle
vaccinate
(s)he was defeated in boxing
press or crush sugarcane
press or crush sugarcane
close (not fasten) the door before sleeping
the escorting of visitors started at 7.30
the door was partly closed
load a gun
take a thorn and press it (down) my feet.
(s)he stuffed clothes into the box
(s)he tried to help them win but it was not possible
trot (of horses)
John was unsuccessful in helping his friend
Zacharia had failed to even build a reasonable house
President George H.W.  Bush was defeated by Bill Clinton in the vote in 1992
(s)he held Rosa by the neck using the collar of his/her gown
to secure notes in the neck of the kanzu
as (s)he eats and drinks
the common money was all utilized
We own our property jointly
airline company
farmers co-operative
father and his friend has a partnership in your work
share/divide up
the village women acted together in the construction of the school
be addicted to drinking/alcohol
be associated in business/trade
(s)he took a part in the OAU meeting
I will participate in helping the poor
we were partners in helping people who came to town
Diana invited her roommates to share in the dinner
we are cooperating in helping poor children
the Ugandan army is joining forces with the Congolese army
United States is in business partnership with Mexico
the schoos are jointly responsible for teaching the students foreign languages
you are ready to share with him/her in everything that will be possible
the teacher cordinated the voting procedures
(s)he gave the teacher a share in the teaching the children
(s)he became a member of the society helping the poor
the mother of John caused the women to vote
I would not want to allow this man to participate in helping us
incorporate our work together
language teachers' association
federation of East African states
European countries have a strong union
the old man allowed the youth to participate together in the work
I got the job of working at the port and then did not care
(s)he desired to follow fellow women girlfriend in their habits
her woman initiate patron invited her for lunch
(s)he put her saddlebag on the shoulders and left
he was holding the matchet high
the dung of animals is full of insects
even though we have quarrelled, don't hold a grudge against me
even though we have quarrelled, don't hold resentments against me
even though we have quarrelled, don't have vindictiveness against me
attractive children, their mother should have called them
good-looking children, their mother should have called them
(s)he splits his/her braid of hair in an attractive manner
(s)he is working awkwardly
(s)he is working backwards
(s)he is working in a left handed way
(s)he is working awkwardly
(s)he is working backwards
(s)he is working in a left-handed way
to have left the girl would have given him/her the strength to prosecute him/her
(s)he sued him/her
(s)he was accused of stealing
he was charged for beating his wife
quickly remove a pot off the fire (to keep the contents from burning)
the bomb shocked the house and it collapsed
sprain one's foot
that action would not have startled her
the thief surprised her when he broke down the door
one who has been bitten by a snake, when he sees grass he is alarmed (proverb - i.e., once bitten, twice shy)
Bahati was startled and answered him
(s)he has important business(es)
(s)he has an important function
I am waiting to go to Kampala for my own business
the workers/officers were seen occupied (with)
my wife had no work to occupy her
the teachers who came there for a temporary job and then returned to where they had come from
(s)he was present when her/his mother was being thrown upside down and being done all things
like the angels who were sent to come and witness the attrocities that were being committed
Freedom Fighters
with their white sheets, they looked like angels
as he ascends down or descends up
get out of the vehicle
land out of the vehicle
let [her] go to that old man with the sunken cheeks and make love with him
allow me to show you, at least, my gratitude
(s)he was suspecting something right from the beginning
we are grateful for continuing on in friendship
we have thanked him for his kindness
a heap of sand
then I saw someone well set
(s)he folded his/her hands around the chest, and was stiff on top of the chair of the car
the elders came to terms with each other that each one go his own way
the doctor demanded that the patients take medicine
Hadija forced the child to put on clothes
the mother insisted on the child going to sleep early
drop the bucket into the well
lower the load from the ship
discharge the flag
disembark people from the ship/dhow
bring down the flag
wife and husband had orgasm together
unload the load
work the entire day without a rest.
work the entire day without a rest.
the woman is breathing out and coughing
work the entire day without a rest.
(s)he sighed after seeing his/her child who was lost
the child broke the wind after eating
(s)he was abused that (s)he is a thief
the gratitude of a donkey is breaking wind
the gratitude of the donkey is flatulence
the gratitude of the donkey is stench
the water was neap tide and the wind calm
it is peaceful at home
non-member
they are not ill
jealousy is not good
work that was not of his stature
read amount approximately like yours
a good girl, just a bit tall
enough to hold the tray
The safari ants climbed the tree
(s)he applied butter on the bread
an accurate person
an attentive person
a careful person
party policy
a political activist
a politician
business politics
a tactful person
it was then that Asumini was afflicted with a lot of sadness
when did it happen to you?
when did it occur to you
when did it take place
she stands around here after finishing putting on the brassiere
applause of happiness
(s)he was given a lot of attributes for his/her work
her/his character is good
the flatterer is your friend
(s)he has all the qualities of the devil
(s)he gave a good recommendation after leaving the job
his good reputation; (s)he lived with good reputation
after being constructed, the ship was furnished with shark-oil to protect its timber
Ali recommended us to the Olympic games
the teacher was characterized for his/her research work
(s)he is known for treating young children
The queen is glorified
the mother was praised for her cooking expertise
her/his good character
Praise the prophet
people praise the Prophet
It is said that the best cigars come from Cuba.
give me one cigarette
give me one cigarette
cook with a stove
the driver signalled right
standing signal
nowadays (s)he is in good health after falling sick
his/her work was acceptable
(s)he beseeched his/her child not to smoke bhang
(s)he called on the students to learn
everyday, I request him/her not to be late for work
(s)he went on to supplicate with the eyes
I urged him/her not to swim in the ocean
transfer ownership of property
doctors believe in charms
magic
witchcraft
the witch bewitched the child
how are you?  I'm fine.
how are you?  I'm okay.
(s)he put vinegar into the stew
are you paying attention to the cry
I am detecting a smell
I have feelings of a fever
most of the times you will hear him/her crying for the mattoc
did you listen to the child crying?
the child does not obey
I understand well
I am feeling very hungry, it is time to eat
the voice of the radio is audible
the girl listened attentatively
(s)he will study as much as you and without doubt you will get along well in terms of language
(s)he heard this speech as a sign that his prayers were heard by God
the mother said to her children: "wash your <b>ears</b>, your faces, and your necks!"
that is when I composed the song, a song of sorrow
please keep quiet, listen to me carefully
come to an agreement
come to a mutual understanding
all days
Nunga used all the weapons he had to defend his position
(s)he is bad natured
you can teach him/her, and a child assimilates quickly
Writers have problems if they don't eat maize porridge.
She stood up from the couch on which she was sitting
The car stopped at the door and let out it's wealthy owner.
stabilize prices
you reproach me that you got me a job
His clothes do not fit/become him
to follow a story that is being told
her/his narrations pull and excite him/her
this person is (comes) from China
we don't have
give a shot
give a vaccination
apply force on the sugarcane
let us go, I'll accompany you part of the way
He <b>escort</b>ed us to the university in his black car.
we saw an episode at the market, two women fought
we saw an occurence at the market, two women fought each other
we saw a spectacle at the market, two women fought each other
massage with sandlewood oil
they accused me falsely
they caluminated me
they slandered me
okay, dose love
grandfather <b>slept</b> in his chair
The light is waning
The light is getting fainter
The light is getting weaker
Ali is not the man who killed your brother
code, cipher
I won't tell anyone your <b>secret</b>.
He has bad character
He has a bad/unpleasant disposition
He has a bad/unpleasant nature
(s)he asked insistently again while looking at that girl
one elder confessed that he had admired a white Sister
everyone hesitated
the shouting stopped
constantly
without hesitiation
without hesitation
constantly
some other time (s)he danced the dance of the youth that was at the height of the field
The trees are thriving in the forest
Ministry of Public Works and Utilities
God to conceal us, the preacher thought
we have not been covered slightly
inevitable sacrifices
unavoidable sacrifices
In squatter areas nobody adheres to housing laws.
April Fool's joke
they were used to meeting at night to chatter
the soldier moved forward
(s)he came nearer to the corpse
she implored her husband
you don't miss your ten hundred-shilling note, fifteen hundred
the woman's stomach is aching, it is twisting in pain, it is cutting
Subira was curling with truth
their bodies were like a chimpanzee
this child receives an education
this child goes to school
read a book
recite a poem
if she passes her exams she wants to study at the university
transport sand
at the university, the professors <b>educate</b> the students
she'll start her study of medicine when she returns to the city
braid hair
strangle
strangle
"move there, you Mau Mau" the soldier said sternly
My troubles are weighing me down
a disagreement that humiliated him/her mind and pressed on his/her heart
My troubles are weighing me down
braid of hair
break a chicken's neck
wring out clothes
The snake is coiling itself up
she is feeling ashamed of those men
(s)he was astonished on looking at Mansuri who was in pain
we are the men mister, we bustle about uselessly and fight for life
a springy bed
a springy bed
that is why so and so was astounded to like so and so
show respect
(s)he preferred to play lottery with his/her heart
try, bearing, is the greatness
(s)he showed respect to him/her for the first time after (s)he saw how (s)he had bought beer
Juma, you have become very disobedient nowadays; you deserve to be beaten
(s)he has gotten a very good job, it is not fitting of him/her
it was only them who meritted protecting him/her
(s)he was at home in the world of comfort and consumption
a peaceful life is a life of and understanding
luxuries
At present he is living in comfortable circumstances
start, ignite
The trees are thriving
petrol station
Ministry of Public Works and Utilities
electric light
the way (s)he gave her(him)self diplomas now and then
(s)he suddenly gets startled and stands up
there is nothing threatening to alarm Diana
brush teeth
spit out water
patience rans out of someone's mother
endurance pulls good luck
(s)he remembered the way (s)he had waited the previous night
to call and revile the daughter they had given birth themselves
a coarse, unfeeling person
I brush and clean my teeth also
I have even acted callously by riding on a bicycle
if what is insulting your age is the lack of any sign of bowing down
braid the hair
as (s)he shook his/her head up and down
granulated sugar
remove a coconut from its shell
(s)he pushed him/her towards his/her house
One should not push elderly people aside
drive a car fast
ward off trouble
Nunga was woken up early and thrust into the car
mouthwash
(s)he rinsed out the mouth with water and spit
his/her hair was plaited since the afternoon
it will take them many years of effort
digging charcoal is a very energetic work
digging charcoal is a work of much exertion
digging charcoal is required a lot of strength
(s)he called Idi so as to help resolve that conflict of theirs
magnetic
My brother <b>bothered</b> me, so I hit him.
a lot of thoughts had harassed him/her the whole night
Money <b>troubles</b> my soul
(s)he began to be annoyed by the many ropes that had tied it
she used to be troubled and mistreated by her husband for a mistake that was not hers
poison an arrow
(s)he is a Sunni (a sect of Islam)
grope one's way (in the dark)
Subira remembered the large cooking pot of soup in the stove
(s)he has a good expression (of face)
I see the same faces, the same political leaders
(s)he has a good look (of face)
She looks like her mother
surface of the earth
he is wearing pants beneath his embroidered robe
long trousers
pig fur in the mouth causes tooth decay
boycott a regulation
she drove the chickens away toward their racks [where they roost]
(s)he answered me in hard face
his/her parents struggled to rinse her/him alone
fresh air
pure air
my question is, how does he know?
a thin thread to sew a sweater
as (s)he watched the paraffin fire
headlights
God be exalted
(s)he does not follow traffic lights
(s)he was strengthless both in body and mind
(s)he did not encounter trouble doing that work
get sick
God be exalted
<a href="http://www.udsm.ac.tz/ucb/instiofdevelop.html" target="_blank">Institute of Development Studies</a>
all types of things of pleasure and happiness
If (s)he comes
class struggle
creases in pantlegs
deposit of coal (ore)
dedicate a church
dedicate a church
Rukia smiled again
her/his whole character changed
There is no difference
His opinion differs from theirs
Buy these fish, they are good (they have no faults)
today there is wholeness (of life) and health, tomorrow discomfort and agitation, and even death
as per their translation, to go and study lawyering in Europe is equivalent to playing lottery
and as the girl said, (s)he interpreted it to mean wait I weigh myself
(s)he tried to chew it but his/her father squeezed his/her throat
hunt for things
He is in the store to <b>seek</b> the medicine that he wants.
lay eggs
a lot of bitterness and unexpected anger seized him/her
his/her tall friend tries to be very cautious not to hit that table with his/her hands
be cautious in front of the lion
as we went on the way, a lion suddenly appeared
Shangwe now got excited and realized that all this time he was doing the wrong thing
feel ashamed
this child is circumcised
a tie in the chest, boots in the legs, and books in the hands
the position that you hold is not yours, it is for the nation
(s)he has gone on a journey to examine (visit) the country
I know how to type and now I am learning shorthand
to sell automobile tyres that are in short supply
(s)he will have cut the tongue of any girl who will mention him/her
call by name
if you agree we shall get rich I and you
[alleyways] that are full of dirt
it is about to rain
they asked themselves why she did not want to leave her husband; I want to drink tea.
bwana wake [Kez]; Ninataka kunywa chai.
hand over money for them to inherit
entrust someone with your money
the heart of this creation required to be purified
my cloth has become clean because I washed it with good soap
it is now clear
to wish Bi Tamima peace
a new kanzu he was required to try
baseline
butt-end of an arrow
the one with a small chest and protruding buttock
the lower part of the jag had a small hole
When chickens hunt for food they ordinarily scratch the in the sand
(s)he told you that (s)he want divorce.
he divorced his wife
the wife was divorced
hold the head on the hand
they have desire
greed for money
his/her face is full of glory, smile and hope
they looked at him/her with lust but they hesitated
(s)he was not able to drive him into despair completely
the scent of what is being cooked and fried filled the air
his/her eyes longed for many
I yearn to return home
but that was the desire of his/her soul only
(s)he showed signs of passion
but that was the yearning of his/her soul only
those French girls who lived in a attractive, attracting and even seductive way
the independence holiday had a lot of festivity
we wish to be informed the central issue of our spectacle
Mary was first in our class and she boasts alot these days
the noise of the tin/zinc plate strutted to the top of that table
The child is crawling
it creepped with the ebb tide collecting this and that
entwined plants
The savannah stretches out a long way
an old cooking pot that was covered with a dirty piece of cotton cloth
level land
don't make me vomit by boasting about to me
Maksuudi looked at the woman's bearing, size, and fitness
his powerful build was filled with charm
from here to Bagamoyo is only a short distance
a good figure of a woman stood, hands on her hips
he is strong
Charles realized that his days of living there would soon be coming to an end
a green betel
easily pronounceable letters
(s)he has no alternative to pronounce that word
(s)he has foreign pronounciation
(s)he should not interpret his/her feeling into the pronounciation
it’s agreeable to throw a spear into a pig, but painful when thrown into a human beings (proverb)
appetizing food
the food that was cooked by Danielle was <b>delicious</b>
gentle breeze
pleasant words
split the (leaf) of dwarf palm
without anybody giving attention
(s)he recalled over those things (s)he had failed to get.
as (s)he thought well, (s)he understood that it was not to be ran away from
a tank of oil
Mrs Kocho stood in a self-possessing manner
to cover him/her
(s)he extended the second piece of cloth to the head
(s)he was struck four strokes
(s)he arranged the household items and prepared the visitor's room
beddings
veil spread out
veil spread out
nowadays he has no work, and lounges around aimlessly
these news have spread throughout the whole world
Mrs Tamima drinking ginger
business advertisement
oil tank
from when to when?
since when?
annul the law
do away with friendship
Now, you go before with that box
(s)he preceded (was born before) me
on the back
(s)he has a lot of tons
(s)he confirmed again that Mrs Kocho, even though she was a woman, was beyond his/her strength
(s)he continued to treat her/him with familiarity
even this very time, we were pulling each other's leg
on the back
a tank of oil
burn limekiln
burn limekiln
they widened their garden
their lips are broad
burn limekiln
burn limekiln
a special knot to tie the napkin
(s)he has received a death notice
give a hand in a funeral announcement
expose a secret
open the eyes
uncover a difficult matter
it has become clear
I am walking gracefully and with the airs of a modern child
a bend of a river
make a twist
tremble with fear
(s)he was used to scattering his/her sweepings
a disease has spread throughout the whole country
let the food get spoilt
waste money
the daughter begins to vomit on reaching the door
don't abuse and boast to me
if (s)he comes
a troublesome door
Rehema went to the cultural dance, instrumental music singing and dancing
forgive the child
pardon the child
satisfy him/her
(s)he would not have expected that there would be somebody else there at the beach
that is why a promise becomes a rare thing and is expected to make a mark for ever
her voice was quiet but firm
you climbed the mountain systematically a long way
speak slowly!; slowly is indeed speed (proverb)
a kanzu of embroidery
dated
dated
a translation of the history regarding the economy
I am not yet working
the golden pipes that urinated into the marble washbasin
have doubts
wash clothes.
wash clothes.
redeem a pledge
redeem a pledge
red (black) pigment/dye.
they painted it black
redeem a pledge
redeem a pledge
to tin-plate.
to tin-plate.
satisfy desire
satisfy lust
work the entire day without a rest.
work the entire day without a rest.
work the entire day without a rest.
work the entire day without a rest.
If the electricity fails, they will use their <b>flashlights</b> to see inside.
"they are now like ring and finger (i.e., close friends)".
be seized by illness
dress
put on clothes
dress
undress
work the entire day without a rest.
work the entire day without a rest.
work the entire day without a rest.
work the entire day without a rest.
"to hope, have hopes".
"to hope, have hopes".
rice cooked in such a way that the grains are separate
redeem a pledge
redeem a pledge
leave as a pledge.
redeem a pledge
redeem a pledge
red (black) pigment/dye.
they will paint this wall white white
redeem a pledge
redeem a pledge
put under arrest.
put under arrest.
the patient was exorcised by the medic
historical experience
he remained with his eyes open wide
we won't have class tomorrow
Ali was with his friend when he left
They like to eat tender meat.M241
stir up things until people begin to quarrel
economic crisis
the witches wanted to kill me, but I scattered them all
the audience that came to receive him... had to be dispersed
when the head of the family dies, the family scatters (proverb)
cluster of mangoes
A new branch of the party has been started
He prolonged the meeting (unnecessarily)
but beginning to menstruate does not mean that you are ready to have sex
The child <b>looked at</b> her sister in order to learn how to cook.
The dog <b>observe</b>d the cat, who was eating a mouse.
This food is soft.
They like to eat tender meat.
The sick person expects to recover if he <b>visit</b>s a healer.
They are dependent on their father.
I supported myself with a stick
many areas have gotten good rain and abundant crops
go on a trip in a car
from today you must stop going around with my daughter
the parents, who flew to Tanzania, were <b>visit</b>ing our aunt
a good thing sells itself, a bad one advertises itself (proverb)
if he messes up, next he'll come back to beg forgiveness
perform well and go on your way, you shouldn't wait for thanks (proverb)
They <b>fix</b>ed the bridge that was broken.
life is indeed a gift from God that can be counted
I don't like <b>snow</b> because I like the summer when I can play soccer.
it's almost six o'clock now, eh?
so as to avoid fracas, each one of the three persons got a third of the chapati
One shilling has the value of two fifty cent coins.  (fig: A fifty cents coin can buy nothing nowadays.)
The doctor is unable to cure his illness.
my child reaches exactly four years old the day after tomorrow
a mother's breast tastes good, even if it's a dog's
display courage
his eyes emitted a little bit (of tears)
give a speech
issue an order
she should be able to offer a donation like her fellows
publish a report
Subira's grandmother right then put out her child to call her siblings
fire from a job
the teeth
he hadn't spent even a banknote to pay for his children's school fees
ten subtract six is four
Bahati had already put forth her opinion
save from danger
If you give me the <b>torch</b>, I will be able to see in the darkness.
and she was offered a chair and sat
those words were said in a riddle by his mother; as cold as he had heard said the inside of ice
he who plays with mud will get splashed (proverb)
a great throng of people
Two thousand guinea pigs will <b>be adequate</b> to feed four thousand soldiers.
the sun will set at seven o'clock tonight
She will <b>use</b> a pen to write her essay.
spend your money wisely
this is the result of your disposition
file through something
he has deserted his wife
she suddenly threw her blanket aside
It was I who husked and sifted...
the goats were put into the enclosure
our house has a stone fence
it requires morality for a person to be an energetic leader
the nation of Iran uses Islamic law in its constitution
Ali recently changed his citizenship to be Japanese
the following of animals when they search for water is usually a long trip
the continuation of our customs has begun to get lost because people from other ethnic groups have begun to come in
without seeking ways to help ourselves our country will always have dependence
the presidential election takes place next month
cover your genitals
excuses were changed for seeking out debauchery
they leave their bad luck here
he has a great craving for meat
John has a longing to see his sweetheart
Secretary Lupituko's face began to be overtaken by major annoyance
only one who has borne a child knows how painful it is (proverb)
The tourists swam and slept on the beach.
I will be healed by the charms.
I will visit Grandma because she has <b>fallen ill</b>.
a well-worn coir-rope is better than a new rope made from raffia (proverb)
now Rozi drew to the edge of the couch on which she was seated
his approval will help us
without our assent nothing can be done
conference hall
if there is no fog you can see it from Sukumaland
that city
he has brought up his children well
peace in the world for people with good upbringings
millet beer
the tongue hurts more than the teeth (proverb)
the moisture from the rain is cleaning them
the grass was full of dew
If you fall, you will <b>get hurt</b>.
He will not <b>hurt</b> his wife because he loves her.
European Union
unity is strength
he is not old enough (lit.  "he does not have enough years")
some women came to confess their sins
his entire body aches
to leave her hymen open before Mansuri's eyes
but beginning to menstruate does not mean you are ready to have sex
The woman will cut his <b>hair</b> the day after tomorrow.
northerly direction
this side of the river; on all sides
a flag follows the direction of the wind (proverb)
which person
perhaps a friendship you formed with someone may break up
Russian Federation
the pilot said that the airplane is flying five thousand feet above sea level.
a consumers' cooperative
a sinking vessel needs no steering gear (proverb)
Diana sits behind the steering wheel
weather forecast
security code
those conductors have no manners, better he takes a taxi
finger millet is used to prepare local beer
synthetic fibers
she couldn't block the heaviness of his lullaby, and she fell asleep
in her heart that day was a certain sorrow
Aziza has become an adult although still not ready, and she withered, there within her maturation
the money she got clothed her children
the books are there in the library
call Ali too
the thing that surprises them is how that girl can sleep alone even when her mother returns
sew this shirt in the same way
that thing
the blood has clotted
the finger that I hurt is swollen
then his neck swelled up
the potatoes are in the bag
she lulled that child to sleep
cruiser
browse the kamusi project website
indeed it is my time to begin "to enlighten my maiden"
wage war
he has a small business selling odds and ends
vitamin A deficiency
bad eggs
this chicken lays only spoiled eggs
My mother took the train that <b>cross</b>ed over the river
the shark is the famous one in the sea but there are many others (proverb)
the wind howled slowly through the window
I couldn't tolerate it
harvest fruit
even a broken marriage may revive at this time
fingers of the hand
my child
the shoes that he wore
both books
we will be friends
people of Nairobi
son of Ali
were you ever a singer?
did he ever love a person even for a single day in the ninety years he lived?
she wanted to reach the train at the right time
he was ready to work
I need <b>to be on time</b> to class or my teacher will be angry.
their child
when he entered, he found a platter filled with rice and chicken already in the sitting room
they have a good house
my heart aches, it hurts me
I have a headache
welcome to my place
their things
I tried and tried again, but to what avail?
where is the book?
Prime Minister
when a child cries for a knife give it to him (proverb - i.e., let him learn by experience)
Many will vote in the election
pharmacies are hiring sales clerks with expertise
natural resources of a country
a log can not move except by the help of rollers (proverb)
The student who <b>can</b> sing good songs is a fan of Bob Marley's music.
it is not feasible
it is not possible
It's hard for me
and it was to them just trouble and doubts
The average annual amount of rain in Rungwe District is 80-100 inches.; farmers in murang'a district will benefit from farming tractors
stand straight
stand upright
vertical lines
inside their house Saada overwhelmed like the surf
the crash of sea and waves; a wave of cold wind hits his face
it has rained
water of the river
child, you really have no shame, that is, you threw gravel on my head [darhotwire.com]
that milk
hi, European visitor!
my house, my Mother
which problems
are you looking for work with good pay?
his/her country
all three trees
her shouts for help could be heard throughout the entire village
Yo-Yo Ma disappeared after he played his music.
that child and those parents
at that school over there
Hector is here in Adelaide studying for a Masters degree
houses of the city
she has born a child
She was <b>giving birth</b> to the baby in the house.
these trees have really born fruit
his father boxed his ears
the full moon shined
his orange tree has spread oranges (he has very many oranges)
the leaves have cluttered up the paths
bigger
it is estimated that more than 80% of people in the country of Tanzania know how to read and to write
his wife has borne him a child
The baby <b>was born</b> in May.
she is a native of Kampala (i.e., was born there)
Those songs that were loved were written long ago.
my name
For my birthday, my mother gave a <b>gift</b> to me.
he said another goal is to help the government in its efforts to revamp education here in the country in schools with problems
the thumb of his left hand was corking the lip of the bottle
to fill a gap that is there
his hand went to stop up Shangwe's mouth
those pens
an adult does not behave like a child
the entire country
he was ill, but now he is totally healthy
a solid sphere
a whole loaf of bread, not just a piece
extinguish the fire
live fish
water quenches thirst
when you leave, turn off the light
the light is off
hot water was brought, she let the water cool down so she could wash the child
dilute palm wine
Mansur's decency tempered his wife's wickedness
she wasn't sure whether it was truly God or [just] a spirit
the commotion of cars and people passing would sometimes awaken the child
then Diana, as though she had woken up suddenly, hurriedly took off that watch
which friends
pregnant woman
I was <b>convers</b>ing with my friend, when my brother arrived at home.
She was studying so we could not <b>pass the time</b> with her.
She will <b>visit</b> her family during the summer.
when they begin to carefully investigate the history of our country, ...
when they begin to carefully investigate the history of our country, ...
she was admitted to the hospital on Friday, and she died the next day
Bandits kidnapped the child of the rich person.
if that is the way it is
I'm full, I can't take any more food.
I'm totally stuffed, thank you.
The fools of the world, consider color a stigma.
I'm full, I can't take any more food.
I'm totally stuffed, thank you.
I feel hungry
I can't go back home alone
If the bus is not on time, she will be late.
we cannot swim in the ocean now because it is low tide
give her that which she needs
Lead her to arrive at a place of safety and knowledge
Lead her to arrive at a place of safety and knowledge
That which I have pledged to guard and to guide, I hand over to you
That which I have pledged to guard and to guide
show her the path
pray to God
The mother was abandoned by the father of her children
The muezzin calls to prayer
noontime
during the reign of Victoria
when will you remember those who love you and honor and respect you?
Jamhuri ya Afrika ya Kati
many people of Tanzania and Kenya speak Swahili
ubwabwa is Swahili food, rice cooked with coconut
agriculture sector
Tanzania has turned into a country [filled] with the cries of workers demanding their rights whenever they feel that <b>privatization</b> is knocking at their door.
Tanzania Gender Networking Programme
Jinsia Tanzania
Tanzania Gender Networking Programme
Jinsia Tanzania
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association
ya Jumuiya ya Madola
he who who aims a rock at a flock (of birds) does not know the one it hits (proverb)
use this entry to begin new dictionary submissions
in my heart
my place (rarely used)
my name
my chair
my chairs
my friends
welcome to my place
in my heart
my place (rarely used)
we'll see each other later
your child
your affairs
your fruit
your chair
your chairs
your house
are you (plural) going to your place ?
our country
our name
our bed
our things
our countries
welcome to our place
his/her things
his/her houses
I am going to his/her place
in his/her heart
his/her place (rarely used)
his/her things
his/her houses
I am going to his/her place
in his/her heart
his/her place (rarely used)
I aced that exam!  Every answer was correct!
because of the return to him of the skull of his grandfather - Chief Mkwawa - a hero of the Wahehe
The first of Ethiopia's goals <strong>was scored</strong> by Shanko at the 51 minute mark, Wolde Yohannes scored the second five minutes later before Anbesse hit in the last nail in the 80th minute.
The first of Ethiopia's goals was scored by Shanko at the 51 minute mark, Wolde Yohannes <strong>scored</strong> the second five minutes later and then Anbesse nailed the last at the 80 minute
I used my <b>toothbrush</b> when my teeth needed to be cleaned.
Mama put the food on the table.
She has become <b>tire</b>d because she carried the baby for a long time.
Long ago I did not understand politics, but I was <b>educated</b>, and now I understand it completely.
<b>Cook</b> me food now!  I'm hungry.
the grandmother cooked food because her <b>grandchildren</b> were hungry
<b>professors</b> who teach research methods
The second phase of the plan will start to be implemented next year.
They confronted each other face to face.
Juma eats a lot, he's even developed a pot-belly.
He tried, but he's incapable.
it's nice for tea the gold-rimmed cup : with milk added and lots of sugar : when you're done someone else is ready to use it [song]
<b>Athletic</b> champions compete in the Olympics.
The children are flying a kite.
The kite [with the broken string] is just being blown about.
The announcer has annoyed listeners by showing off when he reads the news.
Our country is <b>failing to advance</b> because our leaders don't care about their jobs.
Our country is <b>failing to develop</b> because our leaders don't care about their jobs.
Just what you deserve!  [negative connotation in this context]
That guy is <b>clueless</b>; that's why I don't even like to say hello to him.
This is something you <b>worthless</b> journalists made up.  I still insist those newspapers that publish information about a person without proof should stop it.
The <b>founder</b> of this religious sect is unknown.
Certainly the <b>origin</b> of the stories of <i>A Thousand and One Nights</i> is [in] the Arabian peninsula, the Indian sub-continent, and Persia.
People are <b>jam-packed</b> in the local bus.
this artist is known almost nation-wide because of appearances on <b>television</b> acting in a key role
Back home still other citizens came forth with <b>zeal</b> and a love for their country.
nchi yao.
<strong>Outbreak</strong> of Malaria kills 139.
In some countries, journalists fear to write articles dealing with sensitive issues.
...critised politicians who see themselves as better than their <strong>voters</strong>.
that disease which has neither a cure nor a <strong>vaccine</strong>
Congo, Rwanada reach peace <strong>agreement</strong>.
They entered the car and they drove
and he sat on the hood and he ate
The army ants have invaded the kitchen and eaten all the food
...deals with the challenges facing social development.
..to improve the efficiency of organizations
...training for grassroots development workers
hello, European visitor!
Examples of social institutions:the church, the law,marriage,the nation, traditions, organizations...
"Life is full of rules - I make my own" (soft drink advertisement)
Ninety percent of bad illnesses in the Third World are caused by water that is not good.
Tatu yanasababishwa na maji yasiyo bora.  [<a href="www.alliance21.org/fr/platform/docs/pf_ks.rtf">MAAZIMIO JUU YA ULIMWENGU
WA KUAMINIKA NA ULIOJIUNGA
</a>]
to get rid of the debts of the nations of the third world.
Do not change this line.  In order to contribute new words to the Living Dictionary, choose "additional blank rows" below to add the number of lines that you want.
Do not change this line.  In order to contribute new words to the Living Dictionary, choose "additional blank rows" below to add the number of lines that you want.
There are schools of good mechanics from fake labs.
'Vipo vyuo vya mafundi sanifu wa maabara feki'.  Friday, June 28, 2002
Do not change this line.  In order to contribute new words to the Living Dictionary, choose "additional blank rows" below to add the number of lines that you want.
the soil on the farm lost strength after many years of being farmed without rest
matching exercise
two students
two trees
two oranges
two chairs
much food
many oranges
many mats
This is the knife by means of which you can slaughter the chicken
This is the vehicle by means of which we can transport the crops
it is this river by means of which the fisherpeople live
See the potatoes by means of which those farmers depend for income.
She is the driver by means of whom we will arrive in Nairobi
books are tools by means of which we get an education
Arusha Declaration
speak slowly!
disease of the lungs
The number of people infected by polio and tetanus has decreased because of the effectiveness of vaccinations for these diseases.
participatory (hands-on) education
While the chicken was running around, it defecated on my foot.
Hey, check out that chick over there!
they can be helped to find alternative employment
mammoth project
They are starting to talk about the use before evaluating the source of salaries.
The events of September 11 in the American cities of Washington and New York, marked a new dawning for the world to see the strategy of confrontation by terrorism.
to fish octopus using a hand spear
the boat had a broken engine
The children played at the gym
all areas which provide health services should strengthen the ability to test quickly and accurately for malaria parasites, and to provide treatment
(Hotuba ya Rais wa Jamhuri ya Muungano wa Tanzania, Mheshimiwa <a href="http://www.tanzania.go.tz/hotuba/hotuba/040731_Wananchi.htm" target="_blank">Benjamin William Mkapa</a>, kwa Wananchi, 31 Julai 2004)
It doesn't help much if one homestead destroys mosquito larvae if their neighbors don't do so as well.
Hotuba ya Rais wa Jamhuri ya Muungano wa Tanzania, Mheshimiwa Benjamin William Mkapa, kwa Wananchi, 31 Julai 2004
[http://www.tanzania.go.tz/hotu
Malaria will be better controlled if each citizen plays a role (in fighting it).
We expected that the government would have investigated and arrested all of those involved in the importation of fake medicines.
I take care of cows
surf the bbc website
surf the cnn website
Juma is an examinee at Mombasa University
the youth was born twenty years ago
the student will finish her studies four years from now
we haven't seen each other since three months ago
it's very hot during these months
the pregnant woman will give birth five months from now
School of Accountancy
she surfed the waves at jadini beach
do not go to the place of spirits those who go never return
the village elders have gone to the place of offering to give an offering
copper is an excellent conductor of electricity and heat
merry christmas
happy new year
Venus is the planet that is inhospitable above all
pine wreath
bow tie
visit various other websites using the links below
tell me your email address
there was a misfortune yesterday
Internet Living Swahili Dictionary
The villager used a cutting tool to cut the minyara.
"We live in a world of competition for everything, in competition to attract capital and investments, competition for employment, and business competition." Benjamin William Mkapa, 1 May 2001.
"we put on the heat during the cold season and we use the air conditioner during the hot season"
baridi na kutumia kiyoyozi katika majira ya joto" <a href="http://sw.chinabroadcast.cn/1/2004/04/16/1@5509.htm" target="_blank">China Radio International</a>, 16 Aprili 2004
click the link in the website
13 are caught on suspicion of poaching
enter a word in the box and the <a href="http://www.yale.edu/swahili" target="_top">Internet Living Swahili Dictionary</a> will search for it.
Pickpocket incinerated by fire
Pickpocket incinerated by fire
Who's going to sit on the hot chair, they are all afraid (have fear)
To put on perfume (lit.  To spray perfume on yourself)
Let's go home!
I put him in a place, i.e.  I treat him with distinction
Before tourists go to the eastern coast, they usually stay for a while in Stone Town to enjoy its ambiance.  (<a href="http://www.zmc.go.tz/Kiswahili%20Version%20Zanzibar/utalii.htm" target="_blank">Zanzibar Municipal Council</a>)
These youths are supporters of the team Yanga
Her mother is a supporter of the Revolutionary Party
Papal Encyclicals on Society and Religion
he went to the car to take out the canned food in the trunk
the relationship between a parent and a child
at the swelling of her breasts
Burundi awaits outcome of referendum
[<a href="http://www.bbc.co.uk/swahili/news/story/2004/06/000000_amkanabbc.shtml" target="_blank">BBC</a> 1 March 2005]
opinion polls show Bush and Kerry almost neck and neck
what's happening here?
where are you going?
that girl has AIDS
it's not time yet
that girl's a babe
how are you?  just fine
they will be punished as perpetrators of war crimes
my column in the paper is called 'Gossip of the Week'
the first born child is Jumanne, and the next one is Halima.
The third one is Bakari.  He is the last born child.
more than 40 globalisation protesters have been arrested
opposition supporters have gathered in Lebanon's capital Beirut
organization of files
the organizational structure of our records
clients' records
to address the needs of the people of this area
to improve our service
to recover expenses
Examples of people with microenterprises are small store owners, fruit or vegetable vendors, tailors, etc.  They are individually-owned businesses.
The applicant has been rejected
The clients' applications have been accepted
he has defaulted on his loan (repayment has not been completed)
Loan repayments are expected each month.
Loan repayments are returned each month
Cats say nyau!
Fertilizer, seeds and plows are examples of agricultural supplies.
She is investing (money) in her business.  She is investing in children's education.
United Nations Makes Big Changes
when he entered, he found a platter filled with rice and chicken already in the sitting room
cargo plane crashes in Tanzania
an election will be held in October to find a successor to President Benjamin Mkapa
an election will be held in October to find a successor to President Benjamin Mkapa
opposition parties in the Republic of Kyrgysztan have taken steps to restore calm after the occurrence of looting
[<a href="http://www.bbc.co.uk/swahili/news/story/2004/06/000000_dirayadunia.shtml" target="_blank">BBC 26 Machi 2005</a>]
new forest regulations on direction of participatory forest management
the blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be upon you, and remain with you for ever [<a href="http://www.eskimo.com/~lhowell/bcp1662/baptism/confirm.html" target="_blank">Book of Common Prayer, 1662</a>]
[<a href="http://justus.anglican.org/resources/pc/bcp/swahili_confirmation.html" target="_blank">Katibu cha Sala kwa Watu Wote, 1906</a>]
the Church has been seen as “a people made one with the unity of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit” [2nd Vatican Council]
information and communication technology (ICT)
[<a href="http://www.ccmtz.org/makala/madakapinga.htm" target="_blank">CCM</a>]
organic fertiliser, organic farming
among Ugandan women of reproductive age, maternal health issues are a major problem
a high maternal mortality rate estimated at 506/100,000
62 percent [of births] are attended by traditional midwives
the state of misunderstanding that had developed between the two parliaments of Kyrgyzstan began to improve four days after the opposition took over the government
the lower house of the previous parliament has decided to halt its activities
the lower chamber of the previous parliament has decided to halt its activities
the former MPs intend to give up their claim to be the legitimate administrators of the parliament
the march was in protest against proposals in the domestic relations bill
the bill will be debated soon in parliament
male and female Muslims criticised the bill for trying to rewrite the Qur'an
they claim that their travel documents have been stolen
some of the arrested Tanzanians are claiming that their travel documents have been stolen
they have asked the authorities to intervene in the matter
They are pumped for their big game.
traditional health practitioners need medicinal plants
Every morning I quarrel with my wife.  The reason?  She doesn't want to clean my shoes.
Gabriel closed the heart of the Prophet
he came to enlighten the culture that we inherited from our ancestors
he came to gather us again through his Spirit of love
and Buraki was brought in with a decorated saddle {example from old Swahili}
the baboon does not see it's own backside, it sees that of its companion (proverb)
the apartheid Government of South Africa
critique of state theology
the Goverment of South Africa has a theology of its own, and we have chosen to call it 'State Theology'
Jesus wept over Jerusalem
the grief is unspeakable whenever I remember you
In the ancient dominions, Lake Taihu was called Zhenze, and also called Wuhu.  This lake is the third largest fresh water lake in China.
in the 12th century A.D.  Christians began crusades against Muslims in the Holy Land
the Ugandan Government says that former president Milton Obote is free to return home there from exile in Zambia
South Africa has been plunged into great turmoil
we as a group of theologians have been trying to understand the significance, theologically, of this moment in our history
we as a group of theologians have been trying to understand the significance, theologically, of this moment in our history
happy is the man that reads this book; happy are those that listen to this prophetic message and heed what is written here [Revelation 1:3]
it is the moment of truth, not only for the policy of apartheid, but also for the Church
how many Sacraments hath Christ ordained in his Church?  [<a href="http://www.eskimo.com/~lhowell/bcp1662/baptism/catchism.html" target="_blank">Book of Common Prayer, 1662</a>]
The show took place in the FM club hall.
She turned on either the foreign station or the English broadcast.
there is a new Swahili blogger, Egidio Ndabagoye, from Moshi, Tanzania.  Swahili blogs are slowly increasing
there is a new Swahili blogger, Egidio Ndabagoye, from Moshi, Tanzania.  Swahili blogs are slowly increasing
he saw one of them being badly treated, so he went to his rescue [Acts 7:24]
men, women and children were dragged from the River Tigris
some of the corpses had been slaughtered by having their throats cut
it is believed that those people were lined up against a wall and shot dead
it is believed that those people were stood up against a wall and shot dead
Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi has resigned and is preparing to form a new right-wing coalition governement
Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi has resigned and is preparing to form a new right-wing coalition governement
The first Greek who reached the [East African] Coast wrote reports for us about the inhabitants of the coast.
We will answer these questions in the conclusion of this chapter.
You will see that English racism refuses even to look at their own population statistics, in explaining to us their propoganda about the Swahili ethnic group.
laugh, for be not in doubt, your turn will come
during pregnancy, women with poor diet are vulnerable to diseases
well-known political and religious leaders from more than 200 different countries are attending the mass
blood pressure
big televisions have been spread around in different districts of the city of Rome to enable mourners to see the funeral proceedings for themselves
during pregnancy, women with poor diet are vulnerable to diseases
big televisions have been spread around in different districts of the city of Rome to enable mourners to see the funeral proceedings for themselves
others sympathized with him/her
fasten a door (with a bar)
thwart somebody's plans
Amnesty International is afraid for the lives of the foreign nationals like Nick du Toit in the Black Beach Gaol
they attended the funeral together with tens of thousands of mourners crammed in to the square
anyhow you like it, you will play the muscle
they attended the funeral together with tens of thousands of mourners crammed in to the square
the Church should be avoid finding itself in the situation of being a "Third Force" between the oppressor and the oppressed
the Church should be avoid finding itself in the situation of being a "Third Force" between the oppressor and the oppressed
millions of Roman Catholics throughout the world have been grieving for Pope John Paul II
more than 70 prisoners in Equatorial Guinea are in danger of dying of hunger as a result of being denied food
in two months
everyday matters
during pregnancy, women with poor diet are vulnerable to diseases
old manuscripts which were written in Arabic script
you and your husband Joseph fled hastily, forgetting your bicycle
she moved and went to the picture of the Virgin Mary
enlighten those with envious hearts
enlighten those with envious hearts
she gazed perplexedly at the three-sided square with three eyes
the name of the newspaper <i>Mtanzania</i> should be written in italics
We visited the market and saw fruits ...
you may meet someone that loves you
the management of natural resources in Rufiji District
database field [Open Office Swahili localization]
trial of Al-Quaeda suspects begins in Spain
Hamza, a young journalist, is arrested because he is suspected of being a traitor, especially on account of his close connection to Hamduni, who shot and killed Kigogo, the leader of the country [Shafi Adam Shafi, the novel Haini, 2003, back cover]
24 people were escorted to the dock, three of them blamed for supplying help and money for setting up the September 11th attack in the United States
our ball team was beaten
I am waiting for a taxi.
the aircraft flew for four hours before landing at Toulouse airport
the aeroplane, whose decks are constructed and assembled in European countries, is capable of carrying eight hundred passengers
commercial flights are expected to start this year
a small, light aircraft that has low fuel consumption
this pronouncement he made the day before yesterday at the inauguration of the Science of Citizenship Programme
three months of negotiation between Shia, Kurdish and Sunni political parties
three months of negotiation between Shia, Kurdish and Sunni political parties
three months of negotiation between Shia, Kurdish and Sunni political parties
countries with nuclear weapons are blamed for failing to set an example by abandoning them
countries with nuclear weapons are blamed for failing to set an example by abandoning them
representatives from more than 180 countries are meeting at the UN headquarters to discuss the future of the treaty forged 35 years ago controlling the spread of nuclear weapons technology
representatives from more than 180 countries are meeting at the UN headquarters to discuss the future of the treaty forged 35 years ago controlling the spread of nuclear weapons technology
She subscribes to the magazine "Afrika Leo" because she likes to read it every week.
this will be the first government in fifty years to be elected democratically
this will be the first government in fifty years to be elected democratically
the Vatican under the leadership of the new Pope Benedict XVI has criticised a new law in Spain that will allow single sex couples to marry
he also promised he will improve the education sector, which now has collapsed.
Tanzania's Parliament was robbed of its web site by some unscrupulous people hiding in Canada, who then used it for selling pornography.
driver in custody for hitting someone
after the excitement of finding a presidential candidate
the decision of the court has to be respected and implemented
seals live in the ocean
the Regional Commissioner charged the committee with implementing precise strategies for the collection of the taxes
an ud expert from Mombasa, Kenya Zein L' Abdin, gave classes for teachers when he was a guest at the DCMA
then again, if I'm riding my bicycle, and I run over a chicken, you see I can't hide myself, since everyone will know that it was I that ran over the chicken
He has started to blog in a Berber language, Tamazeight
a census carried out in 2003 shows that there were 17,523 prisoners in Uganda, although the prisons were only capable of housing 8,563 prisoners

Uganda, ingawa magereza yalikuwa na uwezo wa kuwapokea wafungwa 8,563 pekee [<a href="http://www2.dw-world.de/kiswahili/vermischtes/1.138575.1.html" target="_blank">DW 19 Mei 2005</a>]
gay and lesbian acts
a census carried out in 2003 shows that there were 17,523 prisoners in Uganda, although the prisons were only capable of housing 8,563 prisoners
an only child
it is reported that the number of prisoners could be increased until it reached 20,000
what is the reason for girls having abortions and abandoning their children?
in big cities there are people from many tribes
North Korea is reported to have test-fired a short-range missile into the Sea of Japan
North Korea is reported to have test-fired a short-range missile into the Sea of Japan
North Korea is reported to have test-fired a short-range missile into the Sea of Japan
as for money, seek advice from one person, but continue with your plans as you had made them
disown a friend
Dr Salim Ahmed Salim, who was once Prime Minister and Secretary General of the OAU
After living two years in Tokyo, he spoke Japanese
24 people were escorted to the witness stand
Mwanza's High Court has sentenced five defendants a total of 11 years in jail after they pleaded guilty to man-slaughter
Mwanza's High Court has sentenced five defendants a total of 11 years in jail after they pleaded guilty to man-slaughter
during the first round, the votes were as follows
it should also be remembered that it is the first government in which Kurds occupy a quarter of all top positions
police in Dar es Salaam have arrested two people suspected of being found with 12 small pieces of fake rhinoceros horn
he said that the selection of candidates for the presidency was open and honest
And they dressed him in T-shirt and shorts!  A man that had been President of the country!
and they dressed him in T-shirt and shorts!  a man that had been President of the country!
This is a test.  This is only a test
avoid him or her, your help will not be appreciated
five names for which votes will be cast today
in an effort to reduce tension in China, the Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi has said that his country is facing these facts of history with humility
a UK-based aid agency, Oxfam, has warned that the humanitarian crisis for the people of Darfur will continue for at least another 18 months
delegates discuss nuclear weapons
the Prime Minister of the transitional Lebanese government, Najib Mikati, said that the parliamentary elections would be held on 29 May
some schools carry out a vicious selection of their pupils and remaining behind are just those that the school leadership thinks will enable the school to reach a higher status
the Vatican opposes people of the same sex bringing up children
Chahe is listening to that bird very carefully
if you climb a Governor's plum tree don't expect to harvest oranges but rather thorns
these were used to inform evil people in society
That radio has quoted him saying ...
despite the tension …, this is a very important moment in Iraqi history
the session will be led by the Chancellor of Nairobi University, Joe Wanjui
partnership takes a lot of effort from all those involved
about four o'clock
National Executive Committee of the Revolutionary Party (Tanzania)
they were charged with being members of a terrorist group
ethics have been undergoing erosion day after day
even on billboards you'll find an ad in the middle of some village but you'll find it written in English.
he has lived in a polygynous family
The news media, as well as western culture, work hard to spread lies and lots of propaganda about polygyny.
These propagandists don't see the poverty, individualism, exploitation which is caused by a bad system ...
extremely poor
a polygynous marriage is one in which a man has more than one wife.
ya mke mmoja.  [<a href="http://www.islamtz.org/an-nuur3/235/235-9.htm" target="_blank">Asia Mohomed, An-nuur</a>]
The benefits of mistresses are in satisfying the desires of a man and not for the benefit of society."
ziko katika kuridhisha tamaa ya mwanamume na si kwa manufaa ya jamii.  [Dar Leo]
this is a test english example
Tanzania Breweries (TBL) is the chief race sponsor of the 42 kilometer Kilamanjaro Marathon competition
The marathon, called the Kilimanjaro Marathon, which was started two years ago, has helped improve the level of Tanzanian athletes and their participation in marathons around the world.
The gods are come down to us in the likeness of men.  (<a href="http://www.blueletterbible.org/kjv/Act/Act014.html#11" target="_blank">Acts of the Apostles 14.11</a>)
Wikipedia is a multi-language free content project to make accurate encyclopedias
ya maandishi huru.  (<a href="http://sw.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mwanzo" target="_blank">Wikipedia</a>)
a beautiful picture
be silent
grandpa usually stays home all day
pocket of the pants
how are you?  great!
if you buy "salama condoms" inside the packet is an explanation of how to use condoms
I do not want
you do not eat meat?
he does not like to travel by ship
we do not know the way
you all do not study on the weekends?
they do not try
she does not speak Portuguese
I am not a hooligan
the bandits pounced on the bus passengers and stole their belongings
an "article" in linguistics, is the word or letter which precedes a noun to indicate something specific.
they talked about their comrade behind her back when she left with her mother
further reports
morphologically the structure of Swahili nouns makes this pattern clear.
just as it is for other compound nouns, these nouns have related adjectives: Simba Mla watu [Lion Eater (of) People] (that is a lion whose reputation is eating people)
one use of the prefix 'ki' is to make clear that the root that follows is a language
lugha."[<a href="http://research.yale.edu/swahili/serve_pages/questions/swahili_vs_kiswahili_sw.php"target="_blank">MASWALI YANAYOULIZWA MARA NYINGI</a>]
the table fell because its leg was broken
the animals that live in <b>the bush</b> were hungry
ruled paper
that woman is a babe
New Year's Day
sister is menstruating this week
from beginning to end
If she'll register to take this class ...
he has died (literally: he has thrown us his hand)
he has been repudiated
say something already!
he is wide awake
President Mkapa and his wife put bouquets of flowers on the grave of Chief Edward Nyerere
Nyerere (<a href="http://www.ippmedia.com/ipp/nipashe/2005/10/14/51803.html" target="_blank">Nipashe</a> 14.10.2005)
I am going to the toilet (literally: I am going to the backyard)
he is guilty
the woman who is to be married
the students who study here
the razor which you used to shave your face
the fruits which have ripened
the university which teaches Swahili
the books which the student read
there are countries here in Africa where even citizens of those countries put their trust, and their resources, outside of those countries
now when many countries have been in this condition
we went toward the sports where we met a crowd of people waiting
in the pocket where he put his money
essays which she wrote
the writer who wrote the story
the people who left
the border which was crossed
the work which remains
the mirror which she used to look at herself
the potatoes which he cooked
the question which the student asked
the store at which he will buy supplies
the airport where we arrived
when we visited
the country where he came from
in the suitcase where she put her clothes
the tree that bore fruit
stores that sell milk
last week (the week that passed)
the newspaper that I read every day
the match that lit the fire
the shoes you will wear
dictionaries that have many words
the car that she drives
the web link that I will follow
the songs that we sang
that key already discussed
that window already discussed
that water already discussed
in that country already discussed
in that suitcase already discussed
they owned two cows.  one gave birth, and now they own three cows
criticism and self-criticism
AIDS virus
it was around 8:00 on September 23, an estimated 1500 youths from the city of Soweto successfully gathered in the train station intending to continue to the center of the city
if he wants to be escorted to the bus station
I have been chosen to be the leader of this post
to visit another Kaburu in another police station
there are many questions about Americans' operations in Iraq
they already finished
they got the Nobel Prize for this discovery
tuzo ya Nobel kwa ugunduzi huu
a good finger bears a ring (proverb)
it is estimated that more than 80% of people in the country of Tanzania know how to read and to write
he will buy that car by himself
she has paid for her education by herself
do it by yourself
we will decide by ourselves
save money by yourselves
they depend on themselves, without outside assistance
the bird made its nest by itself
complaints of torture of Iraqi prisoners by American and British soldiers
the tough problem of loitering regarding young people
I will leave the papers in your mailbox
four square inches
in the beginning, all animals lived in the sea
first grade
cooperative store
international relations
that woman is a slut, she doesn't have just one boyfriend
he was hired by the government as Executive Officer since 26 March, 1973, and from there he was promoted until he arrived at the position he held prior to this appointment
Uniform Resource Locator
URL
that which I have pledged to guard and to guide
subsistence allowance
news aggregator
with certainty that death was near, desperation entered him [Mganga Pazi p.  6]
key on a computer keyboard
he who is
he who is not
she was present here
make a telephone call
the question of narration is at the very foundation of the writing of various works of literature, especially of prose
the question of narration is at the very foundation of the writing of various works of literature, especially of prose
the question of narration is at the very foundation of the writing of various works of literature, especially of prose
intellectual property rights
Agreement on Trade-Related Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) (<a href="http://www.worldbank.org/afr/ik/swahili/swik19.htm" target="_blank">World Bank</a>)
writing treatment
registered mail
little by little fills the container (proverb)
he announced [it] at the markets, at the farms, [from] the pastures to the islands ... [Mganga Pazi p.  3]
the twentieth Winter Olympic Games were opened on the evening of the 10th in the Italian city of Torino (CRI Online)
olympic games
the twentieth Winter Olympic Games were opened on the evening of the 10th in the Italian city of Torino (CRI Online)
after hard work, I'm completely worn out
he said another goal is to help the government in its efforts to revamp education here in the country in schools with problems
insecticide-treated bednets (nets with medicine)
in general Rastafarians believe that the Bible is a book with the words of God (from an article on the web, author unknown)
Rastafarian beliefs
The Oil Building with 21 floors
the name Nairobi comes from the Maasai word Enkarenairobi, which means "place with fresh water"
a cat can never be made to lie on its back (proverb)
this indicates that there are a great many mercenaries inside the opposition camp
perhaps [my] grandfather's generation would have wondered about a person with (only) one wife.  (Ken Walibora, Siku Njema, 1996, p.  1)
animal park
animal reserve
animal preserve
Kilinux.udsm.ac.tz (The Localization Project of Tanzania)
they took the web address so they could go download Jambo Open Office right away from the internet
kwa moja kutoka kwenye mtandao (<a href="http://www.kilinux.udsm.ac.tz/kiblog/kiblog_sw/index.html" target="_blank">Idara ya Sayansi ya Kompyuta, DSM</a>)
the Linux installer is almost finished although testing has shown that it has failed to install in some computers so the team is still trying to fix those problems
Linux karibia kinakamilika ingawa majaribio yameonesha kuwa kimeshindwa kusakinisha katika baadhi ya kompyuta hivyo timu bado inaendelea kurekebisha tatizo hili (<a href="http://www.kilinux.udsm.ac.tz/kiblog/kiblog_sw/archives/cat_2.html" target="_blank">Idara ya Sayansi ya Kompyuta, DSM</a>)
you will open the OpenOffice.org installation program
Tanzania is endowed with various species of colored gemstones including the beautiful Tanzanite occurring in the rocks of the Usagaran and Ubendian Systems (<a href="http://www.tanzania.go.tz/miningf.html" target="_blank">Tanzania National Website</a>)
Tanzania is endowed with various species of colored gemstones including the beautiful Tanzanite occurring in the rocks of the Usagaran and Ubendian Systems (<a href="http://www.tanzania.go.tz/miningf.html" target="_blank">Tanzania National Website</a>)
Ask any question and you will be answered.  If you ask a question, ask directly without meandering.  Mwai Kibaki, <a href="http://www.timesnews.co.ke/29apr06/nwsstory/topstry.html" target="_blank">28/04/2006</a>
he was absorbed n the sadness of the grief and sobbing of the funeral
his leg is deformed
the food is undercooked
Honorable Speaker, right now guests who enter Tanzania as business people pay a visa fee of 200 American dollars, and those who enter as tourists or ordinary travellers pay a visa fee of 50 American dollars.  (Finance Minister's Address for 2004/05)
there were a lot of people at the meeting
another time Asumini was called to the winnowing basket and was tossed up and down
after the storm, the whole region cleared up
the salt was sat on the table
a hard hat that is worn by tin miners of Bolivia
he trembles
she was surprised to see how her prayers concurred with this speech
the new mayor of Nairobi Joe Aketch registered traders
a citizen of Kenya can not lose his or her Kenyan citizenship because of being registered as a citizen of another country.
The audience is given a chance to ask the panelists questions after the presentation.  [African Youth Alliance]
Republic of Korea
People's Democratic Republic of Korea
Arab Republic of Yemen
the billboards in Bucharest are written in Romanian
the editor's wife, who was born in the city of Bucharest, is a Romanian even though she has lived in the US for many years
mămăligă, a major Romanian food, really is a type of ugali
they partied in the Romanian manner, until the sun came up
East Timor
Western Samoa
it is the wish of the Africans to achieve independence
hopper bands destroyed the crop
their inhabitants who had hunchbacks from climbing that mountain
petroleum pipeline
a person can be proud without showing it everyday
she likes to eat sherbet on a hot day
the person; the children; the tree; the rivers; the car; the oranges; the book; the chairs; the website; the airplanes; the clan
Tanzania offers incentives for investors who choose to invest locally
the arbitrarion committee urged the representatives to annul its first decision [Simon Libafu, March 2004]
beneath the tire of the car that is coming; front tire
everyone should contribute when collection is made (proverb)
I feel nauseous
he spoke to me very plainly
Abibu advised him to take two tablets a day for a week
this person is as yet undeveloped (is still at the beginning of his career)
these houses are uninhabitable
he is intelligent
I have a headache
I have a headache
the table was in the passageway between the house and the fence that enclosed it
Tanzanians have praised President Benjamin Mkapa and his government for showing great maturity in the detection of various problems
several scholars have readied themselves to run for parliament
several scholars have readied themselves to stand for parliament
they spoke with Majira on condition of anonymity
you must come
it is necessary she fills in that form
if you wait for me after leaving the ballgame.
let's go to the market and buy you some flipflops you can wear while showering.
unripe orange
between Arusha and Mwanza, the round trip fare is three hundred thousand shillings these days
we saw neither Maimuna nor even a germ of Maimuna
Subira clenched her teeth
we are squeezing each other
the squirrel jumped across the trees
she talks through her nose
but remember that you still need to have intercourse with prophylactics (condoms) even if you and your partner have HIV
let me pass, don't obstruct me
all his efforts in wanting to free himself from the firm grasp of that European were for naught
arrest a thief
Rosa Mistika was indeed a firstborn child
this child is hard to bring up
she who is claimed to be a wizard [<i>Alasiri</i>, 24 July 2006]
I owe 1000 shillings (literally: I am claimed 1000 shillings)
the disorder began at 9:00 in the morning [<i>Alasiri</i>, 24 July 2006]
turn off the light
the goal for the new millenium is to ensure that every person has enough food
the child killed the bird with a slingshot
you are a youngster (but) we are grownups
the president's pen has green ink
the authority for control of air travel should be an autonomous entity (Speech of the Minister of Communications and Transport, 3 April, 2003)
all our efforts together with the citizens and government will be work for nothing (speech by Richard Mganga, 7 February, 2006)
one who walks with no reason is not like one who sits without reason, the one who walks might pick up something (proverb)
make rash statements
it will be necessary for you to enter inside the blog to use your password
she went in
the doctor cleaned the wound with wadding and water
he likes to be well dressed
I didn't like him at first, but later we became friends
the Germans were eliminated in the semi-final match by Italy during the 30 minute overtime by a score of 2-0
eight soccer teams successfully entered the cup quarter-finals
Gor Mahia was eliminated by El-Merreik of Sudan in the quarter-final 2-0
the Germans were eliminated in the semi-final match by Italy during the 30 minute overtime by a score of 2-0
national lottery
he really is lucky
she did her plotting until she was fired from the job
create doubts
Rehema thought she had reached the limit of tolerating a life that she would not wish for
he is the little rooster about town these days (proverb = he is a notorious character)
I am not a prophet if they have come to seek my benedictions
he will be here at noon
officer of a unit of the East African army
his affairs are out of whack these days
military circles
go on foot
international crisis
wherever he goes, whenever he goes
she goes to work <b>daily</b> day except Sunday
email
he who earns calamity eats it with his family (proverb)
he has eaten so much that he has indigestion
the marathon was run by thousands of people
job candidates must come for an interview
the physics student had an interrogation in front of five professors about her dissertation
cut the rope at a length of about 2 ells (100-120 cm)
for christmas the children were given dolls and treats lilke candy and chocolate
for christmas the children were given dolls and treats lilke candy and chocolate
our economy now is getting worse all the time
but if we go on like this, thoughtlessly,... my comrades we will continue to wear used clothing, we will be street traders, we will be chasing each other with the Dar es Salaam Police, we will be unable to return to farming and our country will become poor, totally poor.  (Thomas Ngawaiya, speech before Parliament, 6 February 2004)
the chief subject of this novel is the struggle of salvation of a woman against a man who had hardened
harakati za ukombozi wa mwanamke dhidi ya
mfume-dume ulio sugu (<a href="http://www.mkukinanyota.com/educational2.html" target="_blank">Mkuki na Nyota Online</a>)
I have never seen the president
the mountain peak was reached at seven in the morning
womenfolk
for the first time my name appeared in a print in a Tanzanian magazine and was heard on the radio.  I was more than a little proud
we live in a world in which biodiversity is decreasing
(<a href="http://conbio.net/Resources/Education/conservation_literacy_kiswahili1.pdf" target="_blank">Society for Conservation Biology</a>)
two cooperatives have already registered with the Dar es Salaam stock exchange in order to sell their stocks to citizens and now can get capital from those sales
branch of a river
she's been sick for about five days now
he was granted a degree
searching for the ways and means to begin my classes
The World Bank gives loans at low rate of interest to member countries
he got a good thrashing
the workshop helped each stakeholder to
understand their importance and also to know the other stakeholders
wake pia kujua wadau wengine (<a href="http://209.85.135.104/search?q=cache:RZgyvf7eRCIJ:www.nri.org/PHILA/reports/RWS-report-Tz-Jan06.pdf+mdau+stakeholder&hl=en&ct=clnk&cd=8" target="_blank">PHILA Review Workshop 2005</a>)
during the ice age 10,000 years ago the Bering Strait was dry and could be crossed by foot.
the international criminal court on the 26th found Serbia not guilty of genocide in the civil war in Bosnia and Herzogovina
I had made the mistake of impregnating her
slit leaves [for plaiting]
security code
he came stealthily like a thief
my brothers kid me
the student's book (the book of the student)
we sang the whole night through, remaining until morning
sleep peacefully
this fruit is unripe
no type information could be retrieved from the database [Open Office Swahili localization]
locale setting [Open Office Swahili localization]
do you really want to delete this theme?  [Open Office Swahili localization]
attach file [Open Office Swahili localization]
what did you learn at school?
be sure that the cutting gets as close as possible to the origin of the branch axil [How to Prune Trees, US Dept.  of Agriculture]
he talked as if he were sure
whether it is good or bad
he ran extraordinarily fast
extract oil from sunflowers
milk that goat
His wonders and marvels, He is the master artist
experiments can be planned with farmers' cooperative groups and the agricultural extension officer and they themselves can decide the type of farming or the type of crops they prefer to plant in their experiments
don't talk such nonsense
he smokes opium
export merchandise
who digs a pit for others falls into it himself (proverb)
Mars is also called the "Red Planet"
the worker was a dignified man, dark, with long straight hair
the representatives were sent first to a lecture about "Bringing Gender Issues Into UJD Planning"
sea breeze
the wind is changing
the wind is dropping
the earner of calamity eats it with his family (proverb)
class schedule
cooling the tongs is not the end of forging (proverb)
Puerto Rico was a protectorate of the US
he fooled me - he is a total "Mswahili"!
home where it is comfortable [home having comfort]
numbers in sequence
that said that they didn't know the capabilities of their new coach because he does not have a big name, but they believe their leaders have done things carefully
the ministry said that it has banned that school from registering new students in form one next year
the group... does not have any new plans for that club
without doubt it was in that spirit of developing new things
the government said that the new ferry to cross citizens from the area of Feri Kigamboni to the city of Dar es Salaam will be available after one year
the company Norconsult is researching new water sources for the city of Dar es Salaam
the temporary bridge was built to bypass construction on the new bridge by the contractor M/S Southern Link
a dog thought to have rabies appeared crazily and went after people by biting them randomly
three people have already been bitten by that dog, but all continue in good condition after receiving treatment
the workers were dispersed by the police
he has no luck
the car door slammed itself shut with a strong bang
how well did you wake up?
it is not usual for her to waste food
he said that they were surprised at Yanga for saying the midfielder is their player when they know absolutely that it was last year when they signed him from Polisi Dodoma
he said that they were surprised at Yanga for saying the midfielder is their player when they know absolutely that it was last year when they signed him from Polisi Dodoma
use veiled language
their prerogative.  how many people have been ruined by wanting to exploit people's rights
there is no work for him to be involved with, maybe just to scratch himself where he itches
great wit drives away knowledge (proverb)
other mosquitoes like the anopheles and the aedes genera can also spread disease
serial killer
plagued by hunger
improved housing
ninth month (i.e., September)
expatriates looking for employment
he has bleary eyes
a weighty utterance
3 trillion is the budget for purchases
she fell with a bang
how can you be burnt by chili peppers that you have not eaten?  (proverb)
which eye
inspire someone with terror
when he came, he found things in a state of great confusion
the accountant used a calculator to assist in division
kikokotoo kusaidia na ugawanyaji
a drowning man grasps at water (proverb)
these practices have ended (they are no longer observed)
the clock has stopped
where did he die?
Arthur, Juma, and Rashid had mangoes, oranges, and avocados, respectively
Ms Tamima flatly refused both pieces of advice
he interrupted me forcefully
Arthur, Juma, and Rashid had mangoes, oranges, and avocados, respectively
members of NAWODA use the phone center at Nakaseke, along with the library, computers, phone, fax, and other equipment for transmitting news
lung cancer
your umbilical cord that was buried in this soil
go home (to one's birthplace)
the madman sat naked like the day he was born
the day a man goes nude, that is the day he will meet his wife
parameters to aid in the satellite installation
take this message urgently to Gloria
she traveled to Tanzania
I stayed with them
this workshop was attended by a delegation of 400 businesspeople from China and representatives of 250 companies from here in this country
what's wrong?
the picture undoubtedly brought Asumini back to his childhood
test7
